THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK
Infection 
Prevention  
and Control
The CARE CERTIFICATE
Standard15
What you need to know
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 15
1
Infection 
prevention  
and control
Infection and infectious  
diseases in humans are  
caused when harmful germs, 
known as pathogens (or 
pathogenic micro-organisms), 
enter the body and grow. These 
micro-organisms are so small 
they can only be seen by using  
a microscope.  
Pathogens
A pathogen is something that causes a disease.
Pathogenic organisms can be:
Bacteria that can multiply quickly at body temperature and reach 
harmful levels very fast. Examples of harmful bacteria include meticillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus (commonly known as MRSA) and 
Clostridium difficile (known as C.Diff or C. Difficile). These two types of 
bacteria caused or contributed to 9000 deaths in hospitals or primary 
care in 2007.
Viruses can survive on surfaces and in food but can multiply only in 
living cells. It takes very few virus organisms to cause illness. They 
can be spread from person-to-person and from environment-to-food. 
Examples of viruses include Norovirus (also known as ‘winter vomiting 
disease’) and Influenza (the flu virus).
Fungi are organisms which live on hosts that can be alive or dead. 
Examples of fungal infections include; athlete’s foot and ringworm.
Parasites live on or in another animal or a plant, known as the host. 
Scabies is caused by mites that burrow into the skin causing severe 
itching.
Protozoa are single-celled organisms that live in water and damp 
conditions. Malaria is an example of a disease caused by protozoa.
Infectious diseases, unlike other diseases such as heart disease and diabetes, can spread 
from person to person. As with all illnesses, prevention is better than cure. Following 
agreed ways of working that stop the spread of pathogens can help to prevent and 
control infection.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 15
2
Hosts
 A host could describe the organism from which the parasite feeds or in which it lives 
or grows. 
Some groups of people may be more vulnerable to infection, for example Because of age 
or general health or some particular illness. If these groups become  
infected the symptoms may be serious and  
life-threatening. If the micro-organisms which  
cause the illness are resistant to antibiotics,  
it can be difficult to treat the illness.
The chain of infection
In order for the spread of infectious 
diseases to take place the ‘chain  
of infection’ must be completed.
The first link in the chain is the causative agent. This is the harmful germ or pathogen that 
can cause infection, illness and disease. Examples include bacteria and viruses.
The second link is the reservoir or source. This is where pathogens live and multiply. 
Remember, that could be in or on a person or animal (host), or in soil or water or food.
The third link is the means of exit. This is how pathogens leave the source. For example, 
pathogens that live in the respiratory tract (the lungs, throat, etc.) can leave the body 
through the mouth or nose in saliva or mucus when coughing or sneezing. Other examples 
of means of exit are broken skin, mucous membranes such as the eyes, via the stomach 
and via the intestines and anus.
The fourth link is the mode of transmission. It refers to how the pathogen is passed 
on from one person to another. Contact transmission is the most common route of 
transmission of pathogens in a health and social care workplace. This can happen by 
direct contact (such as hand-to-hand) or indirect contact (via objects such as equipment). 
Pathogens such as those that cause influenza and chicken pox can stay in the air for a 
long time and can be breathed in by other people.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 15
3
The fifth link is the portal of entry. This is the way that the pathogen enters the body of 
the potential host. Pathogens can enter the body by coming into contact with broken skin, 
being breathed in or eaten, coming into contact with the eyes, nose and mouth or, for 
example when needles or catheters are inserted.
The sixth and final link in the chain is the person at risk. A person at risk is the individual 
the pathogen moves to. The risk of a person becoming infected depends on factors such 
as their general health and the strength of their immune system (which is the body’s 
system for fighting germs and micro-organisms).
Breaking the chain
Preventing infection means breaking the links in the chain so that an infection cannot 
spread. Some links are easier to break than others. For example, it is easier to stop a 
pathogen from entering a person than it is to stop one leaving an infected person. 
The steps taken to protect individuals and workers from infection are an important part 
of providing high quality care and support. It is vital to remember that not everybody who 
carries harmful micro-organisms will be ill or show any symptoms, so you must work in 
ways that prevent infection at all times. Standard precautions are the actions that should 
be taken in EVERY situation to reduce the risk of infection.
These include:


good hand hygiene


safe disposal of waste 


safe management of laundry 


correct use of personal protective equipment (PPE).
Contamination
A thing is contaminated if it is dirty, 
infected, polluted or has ‘gone off’.
In a workplace it may be necessary 
to take additional measures when 
supporting people who are known to be 
carrying some harmful microorganisms 
to protect others from contamination. 
This can be particularly important if the 
pathogens travel through air.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 15
4
Illness
If you have cold or flu 
symptoms (such as a runny 
nose), an upset stomach or skin 
infections, you should speak to 
your manager before reporting 
for work. If you have diarrhoea 
or vomiting you should not 
attend work until you have been 
free from symptoms for 48 
hours.
Clothing
Your clothes can become contaminated with 
harmful microorganisms. Disposable aprons 
and over-sleeves should be used when 
handling anything contaminated with body 
fluids to protect clothes from contamination. 
Changing your clothing daily reduces the risk 
of remaining contaminants being spread to 
the individuals you support. Uniforms or work 
clothing should be washed on a hot wash, 
then tumble-dried or hot ironed, to kill any 
bacteria present.
Personal hygiene
Personal hygiene is extremely important 
for people who take care of others. 
Daily washing, showering or bathing 
will remove most of the microorganisms 
on your skin. Hand hygiene is also 
extremely important. Fingernails should 
be kept short. Rings (apart from plain 
wedding bands), wristwatches or 
bracelets should not be worn as they 
can make hand washing less effective. 
Skin health
Micro-organisms can live on the skin. 
The number of pathogens increases 
when skin is damaged. All cuts 
should be covered with waterproof 
dressings. Using hand cream, good 
quality paper towels and soaps can 
help to protect the skin. 
Good hand habits
Having good hand habits 
means not touching areas that 
can be a source of pathogens 
more than you need to. These 
areas include your nose, hair 
and mouth, and not biting 
nails. This also applies to work 
practices such as using foot 
operated bins rather than lifting 
bin lids with your hands.
Your health and hygiene
You have an important role to play in preventing the spread of infections. It is your 
responsibility to keep up to date with your own vaccinations in line with the UK vaccination 
schedule as it is part of your duty to protect the individual by not spreading infection. If 
you are carrying pathogens, you can transmit them to the people you support directly or 
you can transfer them from other people or equipment if you do not follow correct hygiene 
procedures.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 15
5
The World Health Organisation has identified ‘5 moments’ when health and social care 
workers should clean their hands. These moments are:
1)
Before touching the individual you are supporting.
2)
Immediately before carrying out a ‘clean’ procedure.
3)
After exposure to body fluids and after removing gloves.
4)
After touching the individual you are supporting.
5)
After touching the area or objects surrounding the individual you are supporting.
Hand washing
For hand washing to be effective it is important that you make sure that every part of your 
hands are carefully washed, rinsed and dried. The steps below show you how to ensure 
that your hands are washed correctly:
1)
	First, wet your hands and wrists
thoroughly using warm running water.
2)
Apply liquid or foam soap.
3)
	Produce a good lather by rubbing
your palms together, then interlock
your fingers and rub together again.
4)
	Rub the palm of your hand ensuring
that fingertips and fingernails are
cleaned. Ensure that the backs of
your hands are lathered and cleaned.
5)
	Rub with fingers locked, maintaining
a good lather. Ensure that your wrists
are cleaned.
6)
	Rinse hands thoroughly using running
water.
‘5 moments’ for hand hygiene
Hand hygiene is an important part of preventing infection. Hands can be cleaned, or 
decontaminated by:


washing with water and soap that removes dirt and germs from the hands but 
doesn’t kill them 


using alcohol hand rubs and gels which kill most bacteria. If hands are visibly dirty 
these rubs and gels will be less effective against Clostridium difficile and some 
viruses that cause vomiting and diarrhoea.
Competence
Hand washing is an area of your competence that is essential to ensure the health 
and wellbeing of yourself, the individuals you support and all others.   
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 15
6
It is also important that you appreciate and seriously consider any vaccinations your 
employer might offer as part of the prevention of infections spreading. One example might 
be the vaccination against influenza (flu).
Safe handling of waste
It is important that you understand how different waste should be handled safely to protect 
you, your colleagues and the people that you provide support for.
‘Clinical waste’ is produced from healthcare and similar activities. It is placed in either 
yellow or orange plastic sacks. It should be kept separate from other waste and disposed 
of using specialist facilities. Clinical waste can be either hazardous (waste that poses or 
might pose a risk of infection - for example, pads and dressings) or non-hazardous
(which is non-infectious waste). Waste containers should be handled carefully to avoid 
contamination. Where appropriate you should use PPE to protect you from contamination 
and infection.
Personal protective equipment (PPE)
Your employer must provide you with the equipment you need to protect you from injury 
and, as far as possible, from the risk of infection while you are at work. That includes:


enough uniforms for regular changing  
and disposable aprons to protect clothing  
and uniforms from contamination from blood  
and body fluids etc.


skin protecting paper towels and soaps and  
hand cleansing gels or wipes


the correct type of gloves to reduce the risk  
of cross-contamination of you and the individual  
you are supporting


masks and respiratory-masks to protect you  
from breathing in harmful microorganisms


goggles, eye protection or face shields – if  
there is a risk of being splashed with body fluids.
Your employer should have a waste handling policy in place. This will detail 
how you should deal with different types of waste. You must make sure that you 
understand and follow this policy at all times.
Hands and wrists should be thoroughly dried using paper towels or a hand dryer, and turn 
off the tap with a paper towel. Rubbing and lathering your hands should take around 20 
seconds.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 15
7
Safe disposal of sharps
Your employer is responsible for providing the correct equipment and materials to reduce 
the risk of injury. They are also responsible for managing the risks of using sharps such 
as needles and blades, undertaking risk assessments where necessary. The following 
guidelines in relation to sharps should be followed:


They must be disposed of at the point of use into an 
approved container.


All sharps bins should have the name of the person who 
assembled it and the date of assembly on the label. The 
same applies for the person closing full bins.


Do not fill bins past the ‘full’ line marked on the bin. 
Sharps can fall out and cause injury.


Use the temporary closure mechanism on the top of the 
bin when it is not being used, to prevent spillages if the 
bin is toppled over.


Always keep bins above floor level to prevent children 
from reaching them.


Store bins securely out of sight and reach of other 
people who may be present. If workers are transporting 
sharps by car, these should be kept in the car boot


Do not pass sharps from one hand to the other.


Do not handle sharps more than is essential.


Do not put protective covering back on needles. 


Do not bend or break needles.


Do not separate needles or syringes before disposal.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 15
8
Agreed ways of working
Agreed ways of working are the organisation’s policies and procedures. This 
includes those less formally documented by individual employers and the self-
employed, as well as formal policies such as the Dignity Code, Essence of Care and 
Compassion in Practice.
Soiled linen
Linen that comes into contact with workers or individuals can become contaminated with 
harmful micro-organisms and body fluids. Linen refers to anything that is made of cloth 
including bedding, towels and clothing. Personal protective equipment (PPE) must be worn 
when handling infected linen as it can transfer pathogens to skin and clothing. 
All infected linen (that is linen that is contaminated with body fluids) must be washed 
separately from other items.


Clothing can be decontaminated in a 40°C-50°C wash followed by tumble-drying or 
hot ironing


Bedding and towels should be washed in a hot wash to ensure that bacteria are 
killed


Laundry should be moved to the washing area in sealed, colour coded bags


When supporting an individual in their own home you should ask permission to wash 
infected linen immediately.
Once linen has been decontaminated it must be stored separately from contaminated linen 
to prevent cross-contamination. You must always follow your agreed ways of working. If 
you have any questions about these you should speak to your manager.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK
Infection 
Prevention  
and Control
The CARE CERTIFICATE
Standard15
What do you know now?
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 15
10
Activity 15.1a
In order to prevent the spread 
of infection you need to 
know how harmful organisms 
(pathogens) can get into the 
body. Describe the three 
main ways of how an infection 
can get into the body.
Describe - to describe means to 
create a picture with words but not 
simply writing a list of bullet points.
1. 
2. 
3. 
Infection  
Prevention  
and Control 
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 15
11
Activity 15.1c
Workers have an important role in 
preventing infection spread, not only 
because they can spread pathogens 
between individuals but also because they 
can host or carry a pathogen. Therefore 
workers should practise good personal 
and hand hygiene. Think of someone 
you support and use three examples to 
explain how your own health or hygiene 
might pose a risk to this individual.
Explain - to explain 
something you will need to 
provide a clear account of 
your understanding including 
details like why and how.
Illness
Some of these words might help you as headings:
Personal hygiene
Hand hygiene
Clothing
Skin health
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 15
12
Activity 15.1d
The law says workers should 
be provided with the correct 
materials and equipment to 
protect them from injury and, 
as far as possible, from the 
risk of infection while at work.
Complete the table below to list five examples of common types of personal protective 
clothing (PPE), equipment and procedures and how and when to use them.
Type of PPE, equipment 
or procedure
How and when would you have to use it?
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
List - this term means to identify the 
main points which can be written as 
bullet points.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 15
13
Activity 15.1e
Handling infected waste and soiled 
linen in agreed ways can help to 
prevent the spread of pathogens. 
Explain how to deal with soiled 
linen and clinical waste in a safe 
way.
Explain - to explain something you 
will need to provide a clear account 
of your understanding including 
details like why and how.
Actions to prevent the spread of pathogens 
when handling soiled linen… 
Actions to prevent the spread of pathogens 
when disposing of clinical waste…
