THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK
Work in a 
Person-Centred 
Way
The CARE CERTIFICATE
5
Standard
What you need to know
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 5
1
Values in Health 
and Social Care
educations and relationships. Whilst we each have our own values 
there are values which are important for working in health and 
social care.
Whether or not we are aware of 
it, we all live our everyday lives by 
a set of values that shape how 
we think and react. Values are 
beliefs and ideas about how people 
should behave which have been 
formed by our childhoods, families, 
backgrounds, cultures, religions, 
Values 
Values are central to work in health and social care. They are principles that guide 
workers to understand right from wrong and are about what is important when 
caring and supporting individuals.  
Six values are now recognised as applying to health and 
social care workers. These are known as ‘The 6 Cs’: 


Care: having someone’s best interests at heart and 
doing what you can to maintain or improve their 
wellbeing.


Compassion: being able to feel for someone, to 
understand them and their situation.


Competence: to understand what someone needs and 
have the knowledge and skills to provide it.


Communication: to listen carefully but also be able to 
speak and act in a way that the person can understand.


Courage: not to have fear to try out new things or to 
say if you are concerned about anything.


Commitment: dedication to providing care and support 
but also understanding the responsibility you have as a 
worker.
Another way of looking at the 6 Cs is that each individual 
must be placed at the centre of their care and support. It  
must fit the individual, rather than the individual being made 
to fit existing routines or ways of doing things. This is known 
as person-centred working. Person-centred values tell you 
how to work in a person-centred way.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 5
2
Unique 
‘Unique needs’ means that every person has got their own needs which are different 
from everybody else’s.
Person-centred values in practice
In health and social care person-centred  
values include:
Person-centred values  
These are the guiding principles that help to put the interests of the individual 
receiving care or support at the centre of everything we do. Examples include: 
individuality, independence, privacy, partnership, choice, dignity, respect and rights. 
Individuality: 
Each person has their own identity, needs, 
wishes, choices, beliefs and values. ‘One 
size fits all’ does not work when it comes 
to providing care and support.
Rights:   
The Human Rights Act 1998 is 
the main legislation that sets out 
the rights of people in the UK. You 
have the right to speak your mind 
and be kept safe from harm, as 
well as the right to respect, dignity 
and equality. You should make sure 
an individual’s rights are respected, 
not only by yourself but by other 
people involved in their care.
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/
ukpga/1998/42/contents
Privacy: 
Everyone has a right to private 
space and time when they 
need it. Privacy affects how 
and where care and support is 
given, especially when it involves 
personal hygiene or intimate 
procedures. Privacy includes 
not talking to anyone about the 
individual’s private information 
unless they give permission and 
it is on a need-to-know basis to 
improve their care and support.
Choice:   
Each individual should be supported to 
make choices about their care and support. 
They should be given information in a 
way that they can understand so they can 
make informed choices. When working with 
individuals who cannot express their wants, 
needs and wishes in words, you must find 
other ways of communicating. Additional 
training and supervision can help you to 
develop these skills.
Independence:  
Promoting an individual’s independence 
means to look at what they can do for 
themselves and empowering them to do as 
much as possible for themselves. It does not 
mean leaving someone to cope alone but 
agreeing the support they need and want. 
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 5
3
Empower 
This term means to give the individual you care for the confidence, voice and power 
to speak out on their own behalf and to feel in control of their actions.   
Partnership:  
You work in partnership when you 
involve the individual and their family 
and work alongside other workers. The 
key to a successful partnership is good 
communication and trust; valuing and 
respecting what others have to say. 
Dignity: Treating somebody in 
a dignified way means to treat 
someone with respect, valuing their 
individuality and their ethical and 
moral beliefs. In order to provide 
dignified care you need to have an 
open and positive attitude. Take time 
to do things their way, don’t make 
assumptions about how they want 
to be treated and be aware of how 
personal care may affect their dignity.
Respect:
Respecting someone means believing 
and showing that they have importance 
as an individual. It means that they 
have their own opinions and feelings 
and that even though you may not 
agree with them, you do respect them.
Working in a way that promotes 
person-centred values 
Working in a person centred way means 
working in partnership with the individual to 
plan for their care and support. The individual 
is at the centre of the care planning process 
and is in control of all choices and decisions 
made about their lives.
The values of compassion, dignity and 
respect are essential when involving people 
in their own care. Decisions should be  
shared decisions, with the individual  
seen as an equal partner in their care. 
People should be involved in the design and delivery of the services they are accessing, 
and the public should be involved in decisions about what services are being provided for 
their community.
Person centred planning is about discovering and acting upon what is important to the 
individual and what matters most to them in their lives. 
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 5
4
The key features of person centred planning are:


The belief that the individual is best placed to decide what care and support they 
need and can plan for themselves. By working with the individual to identify  
their strengths and abilities they can make their own decisions. For example,  
an individual may want to make their own decision about which mobility aids  
to use to walk short distances based on their ability, rather than use a wheelchair.


The care plan, or care and support plan, is owned by the individual and is written in 
the first person. For example ‘I would like to try a walking frame when I am moving 
around the house moving short distances outside rather than using my wheelchair’.


The individual has as much control as possible over the choices they make.   
For example, the individual is supported to try to use the walking frame.


The care plan, or care and support plan, is ‘needs’ led not ‘service’ led. This means 
that support is designed to meet the unique needs of the individual to make their life 
better, and not to fit them into a pre-existing service. For example, the frame sourced 
is the best for the individual within the resources available or they are able to find  
a frame from somewhere else if necessary.
Promoting dignity
Focusing on the value of every individual, respecting their views, choices and decisions, 
not making assumptions about how they want to be treated and working with compassion 
and person-centred values means you are promoting their dignity.
Compassion and care 
Putting person-centred values into practice means that you are providing care that is 
focussed on the individual. It demonstrates to the individual that you want to care for 
and support them.
The importance of finding out the history, preferences, wishes 
and needs of the individual 
To provide care and support that respects the individual’s wishes, needs and preferences, 
you will need to find out what you can about them. This will vary depending on your 
workplace. Taking time to find out about their personal history by talking with them or 
reading any information you have will give you a deeper insight into their likes and 
dislikes. This will help the care plan to be put together with them.
Care plan 
A required document that sets out in detail the way daily care and support must 
be provided for an individual. Care plans may also be known as ‘plans of support’, 
‘individual plans’, etc.   
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 5
5
The changing needs of the 
individual 
Care or support plans are an important source 
of information as they are dynamic records 
that are constantly reviewed and updated in 
response to changing needs and preferences. 
A review will look with the individual at what 
is working, what doesn’t work and what might 
need to change. For example, if an individual 
is unable to eat certain foods due to a new 
type of medication they are taking, their diet 
will need to change but still reflect the things 
they would like to eat. Care plans are also 
legal documents which might be needed as 
evidence if an individual makes a complaint.
Properly maintained care plans mean that 
workers changing shifts or returning from 
holidays, and temporary or agency workers, 
will always have up-to-date information about 
the individual, enabling them to provide the 
best possible person-centred care. It will also 
enable them to know how to provide care and 
support for individuals new to them.
Ask your manager for copies of different care 
plans to make sure you understand how they 
are used in your workplace. Your manager 
should be able to explain how the plans 
should be used. If you feel that an individual’s 
care plan needs to be changed, talk to your 
manager or the person responsible for this in 
your workplace.
Supporting individuals to plan for their future wellbeing and 
fulfilment, including end-of-life care
The person-centred approach uses the idea that everyone has an inner wish to fulfil their 
personal potential. In a safe, non-judgemental and compassionate place the individual 
can think about what is important to them and make the best decisions. 
Non-judgemental 
To be non-judgemental means to accept the individual for who they are, seeing 
them as positive and capable of making their own decisions and choices.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 5
6
It is important that individuals are supported to plan for their future wellbeing and fulfilment 
so that their quality of life is improved, even if they are only in short-term care. The Care 
Act 2014 describes wellbeing as relating to the following areas: 


personal dignity (including treating someone with respect)


physical and mental health and emotional wellbeing


protection from abuse and neglect


control by the individual over day-to-day life (including over the way care and support 
is provided)


participation in work, education, training or recreation


social and economic wellbeing


domestic, family and personal relationships


suitability of living accommodation


the individual’s contribution to society
See www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/315993/Care-
Act-Guidance.pdf
Individuals should be encouraged to express themselves and to change their mind about 
things when they want to. It is important to take time to talk about their needs, what they 
want and also what they don’t want. This is especially true for end-of-life-care where a 
person might not be able to voice their wishes as they could before. You will then need to 
use different ways of communicating. This may also involve working with an advocate who 
is able to express the individual’s wishes on their behalf if they are unable to communicate 
the information themselves. Ideally the individual will have planned ahead and expressed 
what they would like to happen within their care if they cannot decide for themselves 
anymore. This is called advance care planning (ACP) and is backed by the Mental 
Capacity Act 2005. See www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2005/9/contents
Advocate 
An advocate seeks to ensure that people, particually those who are most vulnerable 
in society are able to:


have their voice heard on issues that are important to them


defend and safeguard their rights


have their views and wishes genuinely considered when decisions are being 
made about their lives.
Minimising environmental factors that may cause discomfort 
or distress 
The following are examples of things in the area around an individual, the environment 
they find themselves in, that may cause discomfort or distress:


lighting 


noise 


temperature 


unpleasant odours.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 5
7
Being aware of actions that may be causing discomfort or 
distress to individuals
As part of an individual’s care plan you may have to do things that are uncomfortable or 
even painful for them, for example when moving or assisting them. You will need to carry 
out these activities with the greatest care and sensitivity. Before you begin a task or touch 
the individual in any way, you should ask them and tell them that what you are about to do 
might be uncomfortable or painful. Don’t forget that consent is a vital part of care work and 
particularly important when you need to do things that are unpleasant. If, for example, you 
need to open curtains and let in bright light or make noise, it is respectful and polite to tell 
them so they are prepared. Always explore options with your manager if you feel that there 
might be other ways of approaching something to reduce discomfort or distress. You may 
need to get further advice and support if necessary, for example by requesting a referral to 
the GP.
Other systems within your workplace, for example handovers or team meetings, are good 
opportunities to make co-workers aware of the concerns you may have. Maybe together 
you can find ways of working that minimise distress and discomfort. You may also find
that your worries are shared by others who can help identify a procedure that needs to be 
changed. Reporting your concerns is good practice as it can improve the quality of care 
and support.
Handovers 
These take place at the start or end of the shift when staff teams change. Vital 
information is passed to the next team to make sure that quality care continues.   
Supporting individuals to minimise pain or discomfort
Usually, if someone feels uncomfortable they will move about until they find a more 
comfortable position. Individuals with limited movement or mobility might not be able to do 
this. You should make sure that you recognise if they need support to feel more at ease. 
In order to promote wellbeing the individual should feel comfortable where they are. If they 
find the lights are too bright, dim them where possible. If it is too noisy you might close 
doors or windows or adjust the volume on the TV. If possible, adjust the room temperature 
so that they feel comfortable and air rooms or clean away anything that might cause 
unpleasant smells. The important thing to remember is that you ask them about anything 
they are not happy with and then do what you can to make the environment the best it can 
be for them. 
If you are working at night it will be impossible to work in the dark or without any noise at 
all, but you need to be careful to minimise any discomfort or stress. If you are worried that 
the individual’s environment is causing them distress and you cannot solve it straight away, 
talk to their carer (if they are living at home) or a manager to get advice on how to make 
changes. Family members might be another source of information as they will know the 
individual better and may have solutions that you haven’t thought of.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 5
8
Apart from the individual telling you that they are in pain or discomfort, there are also 
non-verbal signs. The way they look, their body language such as gestures or facial 
expressions could be a good sign, for example doubling over, gritted teeth, pale 
complexion, sweating, tears or furrowed brows. Other messages could be becoming very 
quiet, tearful or aggressive. 
If you know or suspect that someone is in pain or discomfort, work with them to try and 
find a way of making them more comfortable. This may be by helping them to change their 
position. Make sure that you do this with support from another worker if necessary and 
always in line with the individual’s care plan. You may notice that the equipment that
they are using is causing them discomfort or pain. Take steps to change the positioning of 
equipment if necessary, but ever only with the individual’s consent. If you are unsure about 
what to do, always check with your manager or supervisor.
There may be additional environmental factors that could be causing distress. These could 
include wet or soiled clothing or bed linen, poorly positioned lighting or noise. Make sure 
that you follow your agreed ways of working for disposing of and changing soiled bed 
linen. Also, with any changes you are making, talk through your actions with the individual 
so that they understand what you are doing and why you are doing it. This will reassure 
them and keep them involved.
Supporting individuals to maintain their identity and  
self-esteem
Wellbeing is the term used to describe feeling comfortable in one’s life. It can relate to 
many aspects of life, such as the:


spiritual - finding meaning and purpose in life (this could be through religious faith, 
but may be equally as important to a non-religious person)


emotional - how we feel about ourselves 


cultural - in both senses: our sense of identity and our engagement with arts, 
sciences, crafts, hobbies, etc.


religious or philosophical - our faith or other beliefs


social - our relationships (including any romantic ones)


political - peace and stability in our homeland, justice campaigns or simply  
political opinions 


sexual - our intimacies 


physical - leading an active life 


mental - realising our potential and ability to contribute to society.
Wellbeing 
A person’s wellbeing may include their sense of hope, confidence and self-esteem, 
their ability to communicate their wants and needs, to make contact with others, to 
show warmth and affection, and to experience and show pleasure or enjoyment.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 5
9
All these aspects of wellbeing make up who we are, or our identity. Everyone has different 
feelings, attitudes and goals. Each one of these aspects also influences your self-esteem 
and feeling of self-worth. If you were cut off from your friends and family you would quickly 
feel lonely and unloved. If, on the other hand, you were leading an active life, having the 
choice to do what you want with lots of friends you would feel valued and self-confident. 
You would have a good sense of identity and self-worth.
Identity 
Our identity refers to our view of ourselves, who we are and what makes us 
who we are. 
Empathy 
This term means to see things from the individual’s perspective. It is ‘being in their 
shoes’ to try to understand them and how they see things.
In order to promote the individual’s wellbeing they need 
to be happy with as many aspects of their life as possible. 
If the individual thinks that something would help them 
to feel better; be positive, understanding, empathic and 
non-judgemental. Listen to what they consider important 
in their lives and help them to make the changes they 
want, for example, to be able to join in particular activities 
or groups.
It is important that you raise any concerns you might have 
about the emotional or spiritual needs of an individual. 
Your line manager, supervisor, a senior member of staff or 
the individual’s carer will know how to look into what can 
be done to meet these needs. Often this will be achieved 
by working together with those important to the individual 
and other services. If the individual cannot communicate 
their emotional or spiritual needs their family or friends 
might be able to advise on how to help, or be able to 
provide help themselves. However, you must not assume 
that an individual has the same spiritual or ethical outlook 
as their family or friends or necessarily want to join in the 
same practices or activities.
Supporting the individual using person-
centred values
You will have noticed already how all the different 
person-centred values work together and none stand 
alone. Independence is associated with individuality and 
choice. Choice is closely linked to dignity and respect. All 
these values are there to give the person power to speak 
up and take as much control as possible in order to live a 
fulfilled life.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK
Work in a 
Person-Centred 
Way
The CARE CERTIFICATE
5
What do you know now?
Standard
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 5
11
Activity 5.1a 
In health and social care, 
person-centred values are 
the guiding principles on 
how to support and assist in 
someone’s life.   
Finish the sentence below 
to describe in your own 
words what the word 
‘values’ means.
The word ‘values’...
Describe: to describe means 
to create a picture with words 
but not simply writing a list of 
bullet points.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 5
12
Activity 5.1b
Complete the table below 
to answer the following 
questions.
1. What does the value mean?
2. How would you put the value into practice in your day-to-day work?
3. Why is it important to work in a way that promotes this value when supporting  
an individual?
Person-centred 
value
1. What is it?
2. How would 
you put this into 
practice?
3. Why is it 
important to work 
in a way that 
promotes this 
when supporting 
an individual?
Individuality
Rights
Choice
Privacy
Independence
Dignity
Respect
Partnership 
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 5
13
Activity 5.1c
Providing person-centred care or support that 
is specific to the individual’s needs, wishes and 
preferences will ensure that the individual is 
always at the centre of their care. Dignity is one of 
the values included in person-centred care.   
Complete the diagram below to identify ways in 
which you can promote dignity in your day-to-day 
work. An example has been provided for you.
Ways I can 
promote dignity in 
my work
Supporting someone 
to join in an activity or 
discussion
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 5
14
Activity 5.2a
Case study:
You started supporting for Badiah last 
week. She moved to England from Laos 
last year. You have noticed that Badiah 
sometimes only picks at her meals 
without really eating anything. Badiah 
is wearing a head scarf and you are 
unsure whether this is a fashion item. 
Describe: to describe means 
to create a picture with words 
but not simply writing a list of 
bullet points.
Describe why it is important to find out Badiah’s history, preferences, wishes and needs 
in order to care for her in a person-centred way:
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 5
15
Activity 5.2b
Explain why it is important that an 
individual’s changing needs are 
reflected in their care and/or support 
plan. Give one example of when 
someone’s care plan would need to be 
changed or adjusted.
Explain: to explain something 
you will need to provide a clear 
account of your understanding, 
including details like why and how.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 5
16
Activity 5.2c
The person-centred approach has 
the understanding that every person 
has a need to fulfil their personal 
potential. Answer the questions 
below to show your understanding 
of the importance of supporting 
individuals to plan for their future 
wellbeing.
1. Why is it important to support individuals to plan for their future wellbeing and fulfilment?
2. What do you have to be aware of if working with individuals at the end of their life?
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 5
17
Activity 5.6a
In order to promote the individual’s 
wellbeing, they need to be happy 
with as many aspects of their life as 
possible. Complete the table below 
to answer the following questions.
1. What does each aspect tell us about a person?
Wellbeing can relate to the 
following aspects of a person’s 
life:
What does each aspect tell us about a person?
Spiritual
Emotional
Cultural
Religious or philosophical
Social
Political
Sexual
Physical
Mental
2. Choose one of the aspects. How may this aspect affect a person’s identity and self-
esteem?
