THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK
Handling 
Information
The CARE CERTIFICATE
Standard14
What you need to know
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 14
1
Handling 
Information
Confidentiality is a very important 
right of individuals who receive 
care and support. It is part of 
the relationship of trust that 
individuals have with healthcare 
support workers and adult social 
care workers.
Information should always be shared on a need-to-know basis only - for example, with 
other workers involved in the individual’s care. You should not share information with 
anybody else, even the person’s family or friends, without the individual’s permission. For 
example, an individual may not want a friend to know about their health or if they have 
been unhappy. It is also essential to protect private information from accidental viewing or 
hearing. For example, if you met another worker and chatted about your work you should 
consider whether others would be able to hear or if a personal letter to an individual was 
left in a public place where other people could read it.
Today there are ways of keeping in touch with people, for example, Facebook and Twitter, 
where information is shared instantly. As a health or social care worker you should be 
careful to use these responsibly and be mindful of the confidentiality rights of all individuals 
including other workers. Many workers have mobile technology with them at work which 
means it is possible to share information about their day or individuals without enough 
thought and so there are increased risks of breaching confidentiality. This is just as much 
a breach as leaving a record out of the filing system or remaining logged in to a computer 
when you are not present. Breaching confidentiality through use of social media, including 
taking or sharing photos or videos, may be a disciplinary offence, and in some cases may 
even be a criminal offence depending on what is shared.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 14
2
Agreed ways of working
Agreed ways of working are an organisation’s policies and procedures. This 
includes those less formally documented by individual employers and the self-
employed as well as formal policies.
Legislation
Legislation is laws and the government guidance on the legal rules that affect 
people in society.
Legislation 
Increasingly, personal information is stored 
in computer databases. The General Data 
Protection Regulation (GDPR) 2016 regulates 
the use of this information (‘data’) to balance 
the individual’s right to confidentiality and an 
organisation’s need to use it.
The General Data Protection Regulation 
(GDPR) 2016 replaces the Data Protection 
Act 1998. This covers any information related 
to a natural person or ‘data subject’ that can 
be used to directly or indirectly identify the 
person. It can be anything from a name, a 
photo, an email address, bank details, posts 
on social networking websites, medical 
information, or a computer IP address. It also 
introduces ‘digital rights’ for individual citizens.
https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-
the-general-data-protection-regulation-gdpr/ 
Overall, you have a responsibility as a health or social care worker to safeguard an 
individual’s personal information. You should also treat personal information about other 
workers that you have access to in the same way. Your employer must have systems in 
place to meet the legal requirements about storing information and you must act within 
your employer’s agreed ways of working. Ask your employer to talk you through the 
system in use in your workplace to protect information.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 14
3
1.	 Lawfulness, fairness and transparency
2.	 Purpose limitations
	
Personal data can only be obtained for specified, explicit 	
	
and legitimate purposes and can only be used for a specific 	
	
	
purpose and no other, without further consent.
3.	 Data minimisation 
	
No more than the minimum amount of data should be kept for 	
	
	
specific processing.
4.	 Accuracy
	
Data must be accurate and where necessary kept up to date. 
5.	 Storage limitations
	
Data no longer required should be removed.
6.	 Integrity and confidentiality
	
Data must be handled in a secure manner 
There are 6 privacy principles contained within the GDPR:
The Freedom of Information Act 2000 
There is a right under the Freedom of Information Act and the Environmental Information 
Regulations (EIR) to request information held by public authorities. This came into force 
in January 2005 and is known as ‘the right to know’. It allows you to access recorded 
information (such as emails, meeting minutes, research or reports) held by public 
authorities in England, Northern Ireland and Wales.
Under the Act, ‘public authority’ includes:


central government and government departments 


local authorities 


hospitals, doctors’ surgeries, dentists, pharmacists and opticians 


state schools, colleges and universities 


police forces and prison services. 
If you work within an organisation where this applies, please note that individuals have the 
right to view anything written about them. This may include documents, reports and even 
emails between two co-workers. This means that if you add to any of these records you 
need to remember that what you write must be accurate and suitable to be viewed
by those whom it concerns. If a public authority believes that the information is covered by 
a qualified exemption or exception, it must apply the ‘public interest test’. This means it has 
to identify the reason why it is not in the public interest for that information to be shared. 
(‘Public interest’ does not mean that the public might find it interesting; it means that there 
is good reason for something to be made public.) You can find more information here:
www.gov.uk/make-a-freedom-of-information-request/the-freedom-of-information-act
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 14
4
Assistive Technology
Assistive technology is any technology that can  
be used to improve the functional independence  
of a person with a disability
Care plans 
Care plans are a key record about an individual’s needs and choices and include 
assessment of risks. They are an important tool in good communication between those 
who are involved in providing care and support. Ask your employer to share examples of 
care plans with you, talking you through how they are completed and what information 
should be included. They must always be kept up to date, complete, accurate and legible 
in order to ensure quality and consistency of care. They may become legal documents of 
evidence if at any point there is cause for concern or an enquiry. It is therefore vital you 
include all details of the agreed care, as well as writing tidily and in a way that is clearly 
understood, avoiding jargon, and ensuring that the information is factual and not based on 
opinion. Someone in your workplace will have the responsibility for checking care plans 
regularly to ensure they are fit for purpose.
Care 
Care is central to work within the social care and health sectors 
and must always take account of the individual’s wellbeing needs. 
Handling information in health and social care
Your employer will have agreed ways of working in place to protect information. Those
in relation to electronic information will include having a computer firewall and password 
protection. Passwords should only be shared with those who have permission to access 
the information concerned. If you have a personal password to access information at 
work, you should not share it with anyone else or allow it to be found by anyone. There will 
also be practices related to paper-based systems, such as where they are kept and the 
procedure for access. Even when providing care and support in someone’s own home it 
is important to know what records there are and where they are kept. Ask your manager 
to explain your agreed ways of working about handling information and to answer any 
questions you may have.
Digital working, digital learning and digital information sharing are becoming everyday 
practice in health and social care. There is increased understanding of the benefits of 
improved communication and access to a wide range of knowledge. It is now an aspiration 
that everyone delivering care and support will have the confidence to work digitally and 
the opportunity to develop their digital skills, whether with computers, smart phones or 
assistive technology.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 14
5
Courage 
Courage gives us the confidence to do the right 
thing in difficult or challenging situations. 
Health and social care workers have a duty to report unsafe or incompetent practice to 
their organisation’s regulatory body—for example, the CQC. If the manager doesn’t take 
your concerns seriously it is your responsibility to make the report under the whistleblowing 
procedure. If your concerns are based on an individual’s information you will need to 
obtain their permission before making a complaint. Whenever you have major concerns 
about the recording, storing or sharing of information, you should make a written record, 
stating your concerns and who you have reported to. You should sign and date it as it 
might be used as evidence, at a later stage, that you reported your concerns properly.
Reporting concerns
There might be times when you have concerns over the recording, storing or sharing of 
information. These could be to do with bad practice relating to confidentiality—for example, 
if files containing sensitive information have been left lying around or the key for the office 
has gone missing. Or, they could be to do with how to handle information about risks to the 
wellbeing of an individual. In either case your manager would be your first port of call. 
Managers must be told immediately about any concerns over breaches of confidentiality so 
they can take action. For example, if files have been left lying around for any unauthorised 
person to see, the manager must speak to the worker who took them out, remind all staff 
of the agreed ways of working, inform the person to whom the record relates and take 
any action possible to limit the damage caused. If a key has gone missing there need to 
be checks to see that nothing has been improperly removed and the locks need to be 
changed.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK
Handling 
Information
The CARE CERTIFICATE
Standard14
What do you know now?
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 14
7
Activity 14.1a
Complete the table below
to show your understanding 
of agreed ways of working 
for handling information 
and two pieces of related 
legislation. You will need to 
describe how they affect
the recording, storing and 
sharing of information.
Describe - to describe means to create a 
picture with words but not simply writing 
a list of bullet points.
Handling Information
How does it affect 
the recording, 
storing and sharing 
of information?
Agreed ways  
of working
This includes....
The aim of this legislation is....
The aim of this legislation is....
Legislation 1:
.....................
Legislation 2:
.....................
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 14
8
Activity 14.1b
Part i) Use the diagram 
below to identify the secure 
systems used in your 
workplace for recording, 
storing and sharing 
information.
Identify - point out, highlight or note 
down the main answers or examples  
that relate to the subject.  
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK
Secure systems 
for recording, 
storing and 
sharing 
information 
include...
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 14
9
Vulnerable
Responsibility
Trust
Protect
Private
Safeguard
Activity 14.1b
Part ii) Now that you have 
thought about some of the 
secure systems used in 
your workplace, provide an 
explanation of why it is important 
to have secure systems for 
recording, storing and sharing 
information. Make sure you 
use the following words in your 
answer:
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 14
10
Activity 14.1d
Part i) For each of the 
statements below, decide 
whether agreed ways 
of working in relation to 
handling information have 
been followed. Tick either 
yes or no.
Sensitive personal information about individuals is left on display 
The last person on the staff computer has not logged out properly 
An individual is taken to a private and safe area to discuss their concerns 
An individual’s circumstance is discussed by colleagues over a lunch 
break 
The manager does not address a complaint made by an individual you 
support about a breach of confidentiality of their personal information 
An individual’s private details are taken and stored in a secure or locked 
cupboard
Two workers communicate about an individual, when they are off duty 
through a Facebook message
Agreed ways 
of working 
followed?
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
YES
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
NO
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 14
11
Activity 14.1d
Part ii) Thinking about the 
statements above that 
would need to be reported, 
explain how and to whom 
you would raise your 
concerns, or whistleblow, if 
you felt that agreed ways 
of working had not been 
followed.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK
Explain: to explain something you will 
need to provide a clear account of your 
understanding including details like why 
and how.
