THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK
Privacy and 
Dignity
The CARE CERTIFICATE
7
Standard
What you need to know
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 7
1
Privacy and 
dignity 
Two important values when 
providing care and support are:
The safeguarding and wellbeing of 
individuals are very important. As far as 
possible, you should get to know each 
individual; their background and ideas, 
wishes, likes and dislikes. You should 
always provide personalised care and 
support that puts an individual at the 
centre of their care. You should enable 
them to be as independent as possible 
and respect their privacy and dignity. 
Working in this way reduces the risk of an 
individual being treated in a way that is 
degrading or harmful.


	Privacy: giving someone space where and when they need it


Dignity: focusing on the value of every individual, including:


	respecting their views, choices and decisions 


	not making assumptions about how they want to be treated


	working with care and compassion


	communicating directly with the individual whenever possible.
Privacy of information 
Part of providing good care and support involves building trust and confidence and having 
the best interests of individuals in mind. Do not discuss personal information where others 
might overhear or by using too loud a voice. Personal information includes things like their 
health conditions, sexual orientation, personal history or social circumstances. Individuals 
may tell you other private information that they trust you to keep to yourself. Unless it 
is necessary to pass this on for health and social care reasons you should keep this 
confidential. That will have the added benefit of it helping to build trust.
Confidentiality is a very important right of individuals who receive care and support. 
Information should always be shared on a need-to-know basis only, for example with other 
workers involved in their care. You should not share information with anybody else, even 
the person’s family or friends, without their permission. For example, an individual may not 
want a friend to know about their health or if they have been unhappy.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 7
2
There might be occasions when an individual 
does not want to share information that you 
feel is important for other workers to know 
to be able to provide good quality care and 
support. It is important that you explain this 
to the individual concerned, giving your 
reasons. Try to find agreement over the level 
of information they are willing for you to pass 
on. If you still feel that this is not in their best 
interests, talk to your manager about the 
dilemma you are facing. They will help you 
judge whether you should tell the individual 
that you must pass something on in the best 
interests of their care and support.
Privacy and dignity in care and support
Individuals should always feel safe and comfortable. Talk with them or look at their care 
plan to find out how they want to be treated in different situations. In particular, it is 
important to find out how the individual would like their carer, family members or friends to 
be involved or kept up to date about their care and support. They may want to be totally 
responsible themselves for passing on information or about how far they want to involve 
them in their personal care or life. You should respect and support them in their choice 
which will sometimes involve having to sensitively challenge the assumptions that others 
have made.
Each individual has a different view of what they see as their personal space so it is 
important to find out from them what is comfortable for them. In general these are some 
examples of ways that you should protect their privacy:


always ask individuals before touching  
them in any way  


knock on the door or speak before you enter  
the particular space or room they are in


if your role involves supporting 
individuals to wash or dress make 
sure you protect their dignity and 
privacy by making sure curtains, 
screens or doors are properly closed


clothing or hospital gowns should 
always be arranged in a  
dignified way


if someone needs support to go to 
the toilet they should not have to 
wait or be left too long for you to 
return.  
In each workplace, issues about privacy 
and dignity will vary so make sure you 
understand what they are by talking with 
other workers or your manager.  
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 7
3
Making choices  
To promote the dignity of all individuals they should be fully involved in any decision that 
affects their care, including personal decisions (such as what to eat, what to wear and 
what time to go to bed), and wider decisions about their care or support. 
Choices can only be made if people have information. If they know the options, the risks 
and possible implications they can make the choice that is right for them. This is ‘informed’ 
choice. Sometimes decisions are difficult even when an individual has all the information 
available. There are a number of ways that you could help the individual to make informed 
choices. You can explain information, find people who can share their experiences or ask 
for the help of specialist workers. It might also support them to involve other people they 
trust, like friends or relatives. An advocate might be an additional option to help someone 
to make a decision where they need additional help to understand and consider their 
options and the risks.
Sometimes an individual may not be able to understand and retain the information they 
need to make a decision or communicate their choice.  If this is the case they may lack the 
mental capacity to make the decision.
The individual may be able to make day-to-day decisions, for example what to wear and 
what they want to eat, but not able to make complex decisions - for example, about money 
or medical issues. In situations where you are not entirely sure about the individual’s 
capacity, please seek additional advice or guidance.
Risk assessment
When looking at options that you are helping a person make decisions about, risk 
assessments are a legal requirement and will give clear guidance on how to keep 
people safe and prevent danger, harm and accidents. Every individual should have a 
risk assessment as part of their care, support, rehabilitation or treatment plan. This will 
have information on the person’s daily care and support, for example personal hygiene or 
mobility, and how best to protect them and others from harm.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 7
4
A risk assessment contains information on possible hazards to do with the care and 
support provided and steps that need to be taken to control any risks.
The Health and Safety Executive (HSE) propose five steps to risk assessments:
1. Identify the hazards.
2. Decide who might be harmed and how.
3. Evaluate the risks and decide on precautions.
4. Record your findings and implement them.
5. Review your assessment and update if necessary.
(www.hse.gov.uk/risk/controlling-risks.htm)
If a new activity is going to be introduced, the fives steps of risk assessment must 
be followed first. 
Everyone’s choices are shaped by things like their 
background, values, culture, religion or similar 
beliefs (if any), education or past experiences. 
Equally, everyone has the right to weigh up and take 
risks that they believe will make their life enjoyable 
and worthwhile. As a worker you can give your 
view if the decision affects their health or social 
care, but it is the individual’s right to make a choice 
and take any risks once they understand all the 
information available and are fully aware of the risks. 
Risk enablement involves supporting individuals to 
identify and assess their own risks and then enabling 
them to take the risks they choose.
The person-centred approach in health and social 
care tries to involve the individual in the planning 
of their care and support as much as possible. 
However, there might be times when someone is 
unhappy with decisions that have been made on 
their behalf or with the choices they are offered. If 
this is not within your power to change you should 
tell them about their right to complain and support 
them to follow the complaints procedure.
Supporting active participation 
Active participation is a way of working that supports an individual’s right to participate in 
the activities and relationships of everyday life as independently as possible. The individual 
is an active partner in their own care or support rather than being passive. The individual 
is the ‘expert on themselves’ who knows best the way of life that matters to them, and 
the worker must listen and take this into account at all times. For example, when it is a 
birthday or a special occasion, the worker must ask the individual if and how they would 
like to celebrate rather than making assumptions or telling others about the occasion 
without their permission. Taking control of their own care and support helps an individual 
build their identity and self-esteem. You should also keep equality and diversity in mind, 
giving every individual an equal opportunity of achieving their goals, valuing their diversity 
and finding solutions that work for them.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 7
5
Selfcare
The ability to have control and care for oneself contributes to privacy and dignity. Skills for 
Care and Skills for Health have developed the Common Core Principles for Self Care. The 
purpose of the principles is to enable all those who work in health and social care to make 
personalised services a reality. They put people at the centre of the planning process, and 
recognise that they are best placed to understand their own needs and how to meet them. 
You can find the principles at www.skillsforcare.org.uk/selfcare 
When working in health or social care you need to be positive, open-minded and show 
respect for other people’s attitudes and beliefs, especially when they differ from your own. 
Your job is to care for the physical, emotional and spiritual wellbeing of an individual and 
allow them, as far as possible, to live their life the way they choose or to get back to the 
best health possible to allow them to do this. 
Prejudice and stereotyping  have no place in health or social care and should always be 
challenged. Reflecting on your own attitudes and beliefs is crucial to making sure that you 
do not allow them to affect your quality of work.
Stereotyping  
To have an opinion about a group and applying this to anyone belonging to this 
group, for example, “No woman can park a car”.
Prejudice
This could mean to not like someone just because of the group they belong to.
There will be times when you face problems about how you can provide the best care and 
support and need to ask advice from others. It is important that you share any concerns 
about privacy or dignity with your manager and always follow your agreed ways of working.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK
Privacy and 
Dignity
The CARE CERTIFICATE
7
What do you know now?
Standard
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 7
7
Activity 7.1a 
In relation to care practice, 
describe what is meant 
by the terms privacy and 
dignity.
Privacy is...
Dignity is...
Describe - To describe means to create 
a picture with words but not simply writing 
a list of bullet points.
Describe - to describe means to create a 
picture with words but not simply writing 
a list of bullet points.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 7
8
Activity 7.1b 
As a healthcare support worker or 
adult social care worker, you will
be providing care to individuals who 
have a range of different needs, 
wishes and preferences and in 
situations which may be sensitive, 
personal or challenging. In the
table below, list situations where an 
individual’s privacy and dignity could 
be compromised and then for each 
one describe how you would maintain 
their privacy and dignity. An example 
has been provided for you.
Situations when an individual’s privacy and 
dignity could be compromised
Describe how you would maintain the 
individual’s privacy and dignity in this 
situation
1. When entering the space, bedside, 
cubicle, room, home that an individual is in
The code of conduct for healthcare support 
workers and adult social care workers 
states that I must gain consent before 
providing care and support to an individual.  
Therefore, I must always make my 
presence known and ask if the individual is 
happy for me to enter the space they are in 
2.
3.
4.
5.
Describe: to describe means 
to create a picture with words 
but not simply writing a list of 
bullet points. Include details 
like why and how.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 7
9
Activity 7.2c 
It is essential that you do not 
disclose anything about an 
individual that they wish to 
be kept private, unless it is 
appropriate to do so. Explain why 
this is so important. You could 
include the aspects of a person’s 
life in the grey boxes in your 
answer.
Health condition    
Social circumstances 
Sexual orientation  
Personal history
Explain - to explain something you will 
need to provide a clear account of your 
understanding including details like why 
and how.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 7
10
Activity 7.3a
There are a number of ways 
that you can help individuals 
to make informed choices. 
Describe three different 
ways in the boxes below. An 
example has been provided 
for you.
1. Provide as much information  
as possible
2.
3.
Describe - To describe means to create 
a picture with words but not simply writing 
a list of bullet points.
Describe - to describe means to create a 
picture with words but not simply writing 
a list of bullet points.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 7
11
Activity 7.3b & c
Risk taking, risk assessment 
and risk enablement are three 
terms that you should be 
familiar with as a care worker. 
Familiarise yourself with these 
terms and answer the two 
questions below.
1. How can risk assessment be used to support the right of individuals to make their 
own decisions?
2. Why must you ensure that your personal views do not influence an individual’s 
own choices or decisions? 
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 7
12
Activity 7.3d
Part i) For each of the 
statements below, decide 
whether you need to support 
the individual to question or 
challenge the decision.
Would you support the 
individual to question or 
challenge the decision?
An individual has been transferred to a new service 
or situation without being informed of the change
YES
NO
An individual has consented to being referred to a 
speech therapist for support after a stroke
YES
NO
An individual’s diet plan has been changed but they 
are not sure why 
YES
NO
Part i) Thinking about the statements above, describe why you would need to support 
individuals to question or challenge decisions made about them by others. Include the 
following in your answer:
Confidence       
Empower
Self-esteem        
Person-centred care  
Describe - To describe means to create 
a picture with words but not simply writing 
a list of bullet points.
Describe - to describe means to create a 
picture with words but not simply writing 
a list of bullet points.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 7
13
Activity 7.4d
As part of your duty of care, you have 
a responsibility to support individuals 
to question or challenge the decisions 
that are made about them by others, 
especially if these decisions have 
been made without their involvement 
or consent. For the two examples 
below, state how you would support 
the individuals to question or challenge 
the decision and also describe how 
you would report your concerns to a 
relevant person.
State how you would 
support the individual 
to question or challenge 
the decision
Describe how you would 
report any concerns 
you have to the relevant 
person (this could include 
a senior member of staff, 
carer or family member)
Example 1: An individual 
tells you that their 
medication has been 
changed and they are 
experiencing side effects; 
they think this is because 
of another  pre-existing 
condition. 
Example 2: One of the 
individuals you support 
who has dementia has 
been declined access 
to a service or activity 
as it is believed it may 
cause unwanted negative 
emotions.   
Describe: to describe means 
to create a picture with words 
but not simply writing a list of 
bullet points. Include details like 
why and how.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 7
14
Activity 7.5a, b & d
Valuing the individuals you 
care for and support makes 
a very important contribution 
to encouraging active 
participation. 
Part ii) Complete the table below to show how 
you can support active participation for the 
individual involved:
Explain how you 
would enable the 
individual to make 
informed choices 
about their lives
Why is it important 
to enable the 
individual to 
develop skills in 
self-care?
Why is it important 
to enable the 
individual to 
maintain their 
own network of 
friends within their 
community?
A young ex-
serviceman is 
being rehabilitated 
in hospital 
after receiving 
significant trauma 
to both legs. He 
is soon to return 
home to his wife 
and children 
with support of 
an occupational 
therapist to ensure 
his home is 
equipped with the 
correct services 
to continue his 
rehabilitation. Prior 
to sustaining his 
injuries, he was 
engaged in many 
social activities 
and enjoyed sports 
such as basketball 
and surfing.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 7
15
Activity 7.5a,  
b & d
Part ii) 
Describe the importance 
of how valuing individuals, 
such as the one above, 
helps to contribute to 
and encourage active 
participation. You could use 
the example to help you 
describe your points.
Describe - To describe means to create 
a picture with words but not simply writing 
a list of bullet points.
Describe - to describe means to create a 
picture with words but not simply writing 
a list of bullet points.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 7
16
Activity 7.5c
Complete the diagram 
below to list other ways you 
can use to support active 
participation.
Ways to 
support active 
participation could 
include...
List - this term means to identify the 
main points which can be written as 
bullet points
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 7
17
Activity 7.6b
Self-awareness and reflection 
is an essential part of your care 
practice and being aware of 
your own attitudes and beliefs 
can help you to make sure 
the quality of your work is not 
affected negatively. Produce a 
written account to show how 
your personal views could 
restrict the individual’s ability to 
actively participate in their care.
Reflection: reflection is the process of 
thinking about your experiences in an critical 
way to explore what you could do differently, 
improve on or remember for next time. A 
reflective account could include:


What happened?


What went well?


What didn’t go so well?


What could you do to improve?


How will you put this into practice  
next time?
