THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK
Safeguarding 
Children
The CARE CERTIFICATE
Standard11
What you need to know
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 11
1
Safeguarding 
children
Child protection and 
safeguarding is everyone’s 
responsibility: it is not only 
childcare workers that have a 
duty to promote the welfare of 
children and protect them 
from harm.
When you come into contact with children in 
any way in your day to day work it is part of 
your job to make sure that their wellbeing is 
safeguarded.
Please note that in this workbook the term 
‘child/children’ includes any child or young 
person up to the age of 18.
Child protection and safeguarding
Safeguarding is preventative and involves promoting the welfare of children by 
protecting them from harm and recognising the risks to their safety and security.
Child protection is the activity of protecting children who are suffering or may be 
likely to suffer from significant harm as a result of abuse or neglect.
This is any abuse where a child is physically harmed, for example hitting, biting, and 
burning. Signs and symptoms might be unexplained wounds, bruises or broken bones. 
The child might make up stories to explain injuries or try to cover them up with clothing.
Physical abuse
What is child abuse?
Child abuse is any wrongdoing that causes, or is able to cause, significant emotional or 
physical harm to a child. The following signs, symptoms and behaviours or indicators do 
not necessarily mean that a child is being abused but may mean you have a reason to be 
concerned.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 11
2
Exploitation
Exploitation means taking 
advantage of someone’s 
vulnerability to treat them badly for 
the abuser’s benefit.
This could involve children or young people being involved in sexual acts, being made 
to watch sexual acts or being shown pornography. Child sexual exploitation (CSE) 
means that children are manipulated sexually for the abuser’s benefit. Typical signs 
and symptoms include awareness and knowledge of sexual activities beyond what 
would be expected at their age as well as genital or anal pain or itching or sexually 
transmitted diseases (STDs).
Sexual abuse
This is a form of abuse where a child’s basic needs are not met, for example through 
a lack of food, medical attention or access to education or poor clothing, housing, 
hygiene or parenting. Neglect could sometimes be happening as a result of a child 
being the carer of a family member. Typical signs and symptoms may include always 
being hungry, poor personal hygiene, delays in development, tiredness and looking ill 
and underweight.
Neglect
This is where children and young people are taught extreme, often violent, ideas 
based on political, social or religious beliefs. Signs of exposure to radicalisation could 
be behaviour changes, changes in the way they speak with others or having a new 
circle of friends, use of extremist terminology and their reading material or messages.
Radicalisation
This means a child’s emotional needs are not being met. This could include being 
made to feel inadequate or not feeling loved and secure. A parent or carer may not 
be talking to them enough or giving them the attention they need. Typical signs and 
symptoms could include delays in development, speech disorders or a fear of making 
mistakes or overreacting to them.
Emotional abuse
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 11
3
FGM is the removal, constriction or other disfigurement of a girl’s labia or clitoris for
non-medical reasons, in most cases before they reach the age of 8. Some communities 
may use religious, social and cultural reasons to try to justify FGM, but it is a form of 
abuse. Signs and symptoms could range from severe pain and bleeding and chronic 
infections to psychological, mental health and sexual problems or damage to the 
reproductive system and infertility. You need to be aware of the risk of girls being taken 
abroad to carry out FGM and so should be aware if they are taken on extended holidays.
Female genital mutilation (FGM)
Domineering
This term means to use power, influence and/or authority over others to such an 
extent that they cannot communicate or act freely.
All forms of abuse are likely to create a change in behaviour of the victim. Behaviour 
changes include a child becoming withdrawn, timid, easily startled or maybe boisterous, 
aggressive, attention-seeking or wanting to please. Depression, anxiety, self-harm, eating 
disorders and going back to younger behaviour are other possible indicators. 
You might also have cause for concern if a child is not attending school regularly or is 
being admitted to several different A&E departments or GP drop-in centres. These could 
be ways for the abuser to cover up how often the child needs medical help. It is important 
to know that not all children will display the same symptoms and that usually there is more 
than one type of abuse happening—for example, both physical and emotional abuse.
The impact of a parent’s/carer’s physical and mental health or 
domestic violence on child wellbeing
To grow up happy and safe, children need parents or carers who love, protect and care 
for them in a stable, safe and secure home. Physical care and daily routines are important 
for development so anything that upsets routines can be unhelpful. If a parent or carer’s 
physical or mental health is poor this could be a risk to the wellbeing of their child. It may 
increase their vulnerability or slow their development. It may increase their vulnerability or 
slow their development. It is important to remember that a parent or carer’s health might 
affect their ability to safeguard, but this is not necessarily so.
This means recruiting, moving or receiving a child through force, trickery or intimidation 
to take advantage of them. Signs and symptoms could be a domineering adult 
accompanying the child all the time and speaking for them. The child could appear 
withdrawn, compliant and unkempt, or show little or no use of the English language.
Child trafficking
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 11
4
Seeing or hearing acts of domestic violence can have a similar effect on children as 
being emotionally abused. As well as feeling helpless, they may not feel safe. Research 
suggests that there is a high likelihood that aggression by adults at home can turn towards 
children present. It also suggests that the stress of experiencing violence at home can 
impair the brain development of babies. Domestic violence is a risk to the child’s physical, 
emotional and social development.
Children’s rights 
As a worker, you have a duty to make sure the rights of all individuals are promoted and 
that includes children’s rights. You may not directly care for or support children or young 
people but through your work you may well come into contact with them. It is important 
that you understand their rights. The Code of Conduct states that you should ‘‘promote 
and uphold the privacy, dignity, rights, health and wellbeing of people who use health and 
social care services and their carers’’, so it is important to remember that children or young 
people can be carers too.
The Human Rights Act 1998 gives a number of fundamental rights to every person living in 
the UK. Some of these rights including: 


the right to life


freedom from torture or degrading treatment


the right to education


the right to liberty and security


protection from discrimination.
The United Nations Convention on the Rights 
of the Child (UNCRC) is a worldwide agreement 
between countries as to the basic rights that 
children under 18 should have.
www.unicef.org.uk/UNICEFs-Work/UN-Convention/
Some of the rights relating to child protection are:


the right to life


the right to live a healthy life


the right to not be separated from their parents unless they are at risk of harm


the right of protection from drugs, sexual abuse or any harm to their development.
Article 39 specifies that children who have been neglected or abused should receive 
specialist support to restore their self-respect such as counselling.
Examples of possible harm are:


A parent/carer with mental health issues might feel unable to build attachments 
with their child, possibly causing emotional harm, or the child might be forced into 
decision making that they are not ready for.


A child with a parent or carer who is blind or deaf may be at increased risk of 
physical harm as they might not be fully able to judge dangerous situations.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 11
5
Allegation
Making an allegation means stating that someone has done something. Allegations
need to be reported and investigated to see whether they are true, so it is important 
that you do not jump to conclusions.
Courage
Workers should have the courage and confidence to do what is morally right for 
the protection of children and young people.  
Actions to take when abuse is suspected or alleged 
Every worker who comes into contact with children or their families has a duty to safeguard 
them even if they don’t work directly with them. If you are worried about a child:


report your concerns to your manager immediately


make a record of your concerns that is factual and sign and date it


if you feel that this process would be too slow, dial 999 and call the police; they can 
quickly remove a child to somewhere safe


follow your organisation’s safeguarding policies and procedures. These will set out 
clearly how workers are to act when abuse is suspected or alleged.
A child might tell someone that they have been abused, or a family member, friend, worker 
or someone else might make an allegation about abuse happening or having happened 
in the past. Policies and procedures will give information on signs and symptoms of abuse, 
how to respond to the victim, lines of reporting and important telephone numbers so that 
any worker can feel confident when dealing with an incident. Do not hesitate if you have 
any concerns about a child being abused. It is not your role to judge situations, that is the 
responsibility of the police and social workers, but if you don’t alert them, they cannot act.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 11
6
Internet and online social networking risks
The internet, with its endless access to information, 
is a valuable tool but also a potential risk to safety 
and security. It is important to monitor or be aware 
of what a child sees and shares, or could become 
exposed to. There is a high risk of being exposed to 
sexual predators (for example, in chatrooms), 
pornography or radicalisation. Using e-technology to 
bully people has become an increasing problem in 
recent years, with over a third of young people having 
been affected at least once. The massive increase
in online bullying is centred on the use of social media 
such as Twitter and Facebook, which are easily accessible
through mobile devices as well as computers. Examples include posting negative 
comments on someone’s Facebook site, taking on someone’s identity on the web to 
humiliate them, or harassing someone via their mobile phone.
Legislation and safeguarding
When considering the welfare of children there are several pieces of legislation that should 
be taken into account, as well as your own organisation’s policies and procedures and 
ways of working.
Legislation
Legislation is the laws and regulations and the government’s official guidance on 
how they are to be implemented.
If your concerns are not taken seriously and acted upon, you should either report them 
to a senior manager or to the person responsible for child protection in your workplace. 
Child protection records should always be shared with the parents or carers unless they 
themselves are the cause for concern. Advice and support can come from other workers, 
your manager, the child’s parent or carer, the NSPCC or local authority children’s services. 
If an allegation is made against any volunteer, employee, child minder, or anyone living 
in the child’s home, your manager will undertake the appropriate action as set out in the 
organisation’s agreed ways of working; this may mean contacting relevant agencies.
This reporting of unsafe or illegal practice in the workplace is called whistleblowing and 
your organisation should have specific whistleblowing policies and procedures in place. If 
your organisation is very small and does not have policies and procedures then ask your 
employer about their ways of working about whistleblowing.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 11
7
The Care Act 2014 brings care and support legislation together into a single act with 
new wellbeing principles at its heart. Although the Care Act is meant for adults in need 
of support and their carers it also makes some provisions for children and young carers. 
Children who care for their parents in their own home are made part of their parent’s needs 
assessment in order to establish the support and help they need.
The Children and Families Act 2014 provides young carers with the same help and 
support as adult carers. All carers under the age of 18 have the right to have their support 
needs assessed and local authorities must help them care for a family member as best as 
they can.
The Children Act 2004: This act covers services that children and young people may 
access. It places a duty on local authorities and their partners to cooperate and make 
sure that services work together and (where possible) have a joint plan developed in 
partnership with the parents, children and young people. This is known as the Common 
Assessment Framework (CAF). The Act also encouraged the establishment of local 
Safeguarding Children Boards and joint databases.
www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2004/31/contents
The Sexual Offences Act 2003: This act has two parts, the first one states what is 
considered a sexual offence, including physical and non-physical contact. It defines what 
are sexual offences against children under 13 and under 16 and sets the age of consent 
at 16 in most cases. However, if an adult holds a position of trust in relation to the young 
person, for example as their worker, teacher, trainer, etc., the age of consent is 18. The 
second part of the Act deals with the sex offenders register and civil protective orders. 
www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2003/42/contents
The Children Act 1989: Protects the welfare of children who are at risk and also children 
who may be in need of services. This tells you exactly what you need to do if you suspect 
a child or young person is at risk of harm or in need of support.
www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1989/41/contents
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK
Safeguarding 
Children
The CARE CERTIFICATE
Standard11
What do you know now?
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 11
9
Activity 11.1a
Complete the table below to 
list three examples of signs, 
symptoms or indicators for 
each type of abuse listed.
Physical abuse
Radicalisation
Sexual abuse
Female genital 
mutilation (FGM)
Emotional abuse
Child trafficking
Neglect
List - this term means to identify the 
main points which can be written as 
bullet points
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 11
10
Activity 11.2
Part i)
Complete the spider diagram 
below to identify the 
potential influence a parent’s/
carer’s physical or mental 
health could have on a child’s 
wellbeing. An example has 
been provided for you:
Potential impact 
of carer’s/
parent’s health 
on child’s 
wellbeing
It could increase 
their vulnerability
Identify - point out, highlight or note 
down the main answers or examples 
that relate to the subject.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 11
11
Activity 11.2
Part ii) Think about the 
impact that domestic 
violence may have on 
the wellbeing of a child. 
Complete the sentence 
below to show your 
understanding.
Experiencing domestic violence can have a negative influence on a child’s or young person’s 
wellbeing because…
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 11
12
Activity 11.3
Choose three of the rights 
that children and young 
people have by law and 
state these in the table 
below. For each one, 
describe how to work in 
ways that respect each right.
Describe - to describe means to create a 
picture with words but not simply writing 
a list of bullet points.
Examples of children’s right
How to work in ways that respect each right
1.
2.
3.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 11
13
Activity 11.4
Familiarise yourself 
with your organisation’s 
safeguarding children policy 
and procedures (if in place), 
or speak to your manager 
about safeguarding children. 
Read the scenario below 
and answer the questions 
that follow.
Case scenario:
16 year old Mauro has been visiting his grandfather regularly at your workplace. Last week 
Mauro missed his usual visit. When you see him today you notice that he has got a black 
eye and scraped hands. When you ask him about it he answers that he has walked into a 
door frame.
Fill in the boxes below to describe the following:
1. What you should do if you have concerns that a child may be at risk of abuse or if abuse 
has been alleged.
2. State to whom you should report your concerns.
3. State from whom you should seek advice and guidance.
Describe - to describe means to create a 
picture with words but not simply writing 
a list of bullet points.
1
3
2
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 11
14
Activity 11.5
Familiarise yourself 
with your organisation’s 
safeguarding children policy 
and procedures (if in place), 
or speak to your manager 
about safeguarding children. 
Read the scenario below 
and answer the questions 
that follow.
Case scenario:
12 year old Sarah is very interested in new technologies and uses her laptop and 
smartphone frequently for research, as well as keeping in touch with friends by posting 
pictures and daily thoughts on social network sites and using chatrooms to make new 
friends.
What are the potential risks Sarah might be exposed to when using the internet and online 
social networks frequently? Identify your thoughts on the spider diagram below:
Identify - point out, highlight or note 
down the main answers or examples that 
relate to the subject.
Risks to safety 
arising from use 
of internet and 
social networks
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 11
15
Activity 11.6
Using your understanding 
of the following legislation, 
summarise the main 
purpose of each law that 
helps to safeguard children 
and young people.
Summarise - to summarise means 
to think about the main points and 
simplify or shorten these points to 
provide a basic outline.
The Children and 
Families Act 2014
The Sexual Offences 
Act 2003
The Children Act 2004...
The Children Act 1989...
The Care Act 2014
