THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK
Mental Health, 
Dementia and 
Learning Disabilities
The CARE CERTIFICATE
9
Standard
What you need to know
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 9
1
Mental health conditions 
There are numerous mental health conditions including psychosis, depression, mood 
disorder and anxiety. In any year, 1 in 4 adults in Britain will experience at least one mental 
health need (The Office for National Statistics Psychiatric Morbidity report).
Depression
Some people think that depression is not a condition and that it will simply go away.
This is not true; it is an illness with recognised symptoms but it is treatable. Most people 
experience feelings of sadness or being down; however living with depression is different. 
An individual experiencing depression will feel emotions such as hopelessness and 
negativity that don’t go away.
While you may not be working in a role that directly supports people with 
mental ill-health, dementia or learning disabilities, it is important for all health 
or social care workers to be aware about these conditions. This is so that 
any signs and symptoms that you notice are passed on to other workers 
and that you show compassion and understanding when you experience 
any behaviour that you find difficult to understand or respond to.
If your organisation provides care and support for individuals with mental 
health conditions, dementia or learning disabilities, further specialist 
training should be provided. This will help you to deepen your knowledge 
and develop your skills and abilities to meet the needs of your role. It may 
include opportunities to undertake specialist qualifications. Speak to your 
manager for more information.
Awareness of 
mental health, 
dementia 
and learning 
disabilities
This standard aims to make you 
aware of people’s experiences  
with and the causes of mental 
health conditions, dementia and 
learning disabilities.
Mental health 
Mental health can be seen positively: to identify a positive state of mental wellbeing
or negatively: to identify a negative state of mental wellbeing, for example, experiencing 
mental health problems that cause distress and affect an individual’s functioning.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 9
2
Symptoms of depression can last for a couple of weeks, a number of months or longer.  
Living with depression can affect how an individual sees themselves. This can lead to 
them not engaging in a social life, with family or their work. There are treatments available 
to support people with depression. In some cases, having the opportunity to talk and share 
how they feel can help. There are various organisations that support individuals who are 
experiencing depression and provide further information on the condition. One example is 
the ‘Depression Alliance’: 
www.depressionalliance.org/
Anxiety
Feeling worried or anxious is normal, many people experience things in life that create 
these feelings. However, those living with anxiety find it difficult to control their worries. As 
a result they may feel that things are worse than they are. This can create a number of 
other symptoms including:


physical symptoms such as increased heart rate, difficulty breathing and dizziness


psychological symptoms such as feeling a loss of control, thinking that they might 
die or have a heart attack, and feelings of wanting to escape or run away


cognitive symptoms such as changes to your thought processes or thinking 
negative thoughts repeatedly


behavioural or social symptoms such as not wanting to leave the house, abusing 
substances such as alcohol or drugs, or behaving in ways that affect relationships. 
Individuals may stop going out with friends, or to places such as the supermarket, as 
they are worried about how they might feel when they are there.
Psychological 
Psychological symptoms relate to feelings and emotions, it includes how the mind 
looks at things and how this can affect behaviour. 
Cognitive 
Cognitive or cognition refers to our brains and how we think about things; how we 
process, use and store information we take in through our senses. 
There are treatments which help alleviate the symptoms of anxiety, such as cognitive 
behavioural therapy (CBT). This helps someone to talk about their condition and manage 
the effects by trying to change the way they think.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 9
3
Psychosis
Psychosis is a symptom of conditions such as schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. NHS 
Choices say that around 3 in 100 people will have at least one experience of psychosis.
Cognitive behaviour therapy 
This is a type of psychotherapy that looks at how you think about yourself, the world
and other people. Altering how you think can alter how you feel and behave.
Schizophrenia 
This condition can be described as having
a break from reality, when it is difficult for 
a person to understand what is real and 
what is in their own thoughts. Symptoms 
could include hallucinations, delusions 
and changes in behaviour.
Bipolar disorder
This condition affects a person’s moods
and means they can go from one extreme 
mood to another alongside having feelings 
of depression.
There are two significant signs of 
psychosis:
Hallucinations - where a person 
sees or hears things that aren’t real 
but are very real to them. They can 
also include feeling, smelling or 
tasting things that aren’t real.
Delusions - where a person 
believes things that aren’t true, for 
example believing that someone is 
spying on them.
These experiences can be frightening and lead to behaving in ways that others find 
strange. One way of supporting someone who is experiencing hallucinations or delusions 
is to recognise what they are saying or doing is real to them. Rather than telling them that 
you can’t see or hear what they are seeing or hearing, let them know that you are there 
to help and that they are safe. This could avoid them feeling you don’t believe them and 
could help ease their stress. Although you do not share in their hallucination or delusion, 
you do know that it is a real experience for them.
Most symptoms of psychosis will get better with treatment. However, in some cases 
people may have to be admitted to hospital for treatment and support to recover. If your 
organisation provides care for people with psychosis, speak to your manager about how 
individuals’ needs are assessed.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 9
4
You can use their websites to find out more:
www.mentalhealth.org.uk/
www.rethink.org
www.mind.org.uk/
These conditions cause a decline or reduction in abilities, including:


memory


thinking


reasoning


communicating.
Someone who experiences problems with these abilities may feel confused, frustrated and 
frightened. A common symptom is short term memory loss; the individual finds it difficult
to remember recent events or conversations. This can lead to them repeating stories or 
asking the same question over and over again.
An individual may experience a mental health need as a result of:


a traumatic event, such as an accident, a death in the family or as a result of war


a chemical imbalance in the brain


genetics, for example, a person’s additional needs may be due to their DNA. 
See www.nhs.uk/news/2013/02February/Pages/Five-mental-disorders-genetic-links.aspx
Chemical imbalance
The chemicals or hormones that affect our emotions and behaviour may be lower or
higher than they should be. However, the significance of any such chemical 
imbalances is highly disputed, with the result that there are professional 
disagreements about how effective various mental health medicines can be.
Mental health problems might be a result of a 
specific situation (that is ‘reactive’), but that is 
far from being always true. In any case, such 
conditions can vary from short-term to being 
lifelong.
There are a number of organisations who are 
working to support people who experience 
mental ill-health and can provide further 
information. These include the ‘Mental Health 
Foundation’ Rethink and ‘Mind’.
Dementia 
The term ‘dementia’ is used to cover many different conditions that affect the brain. The 
Alzheimer’s Society estimate there are over 100 different conditions that fall under the 
dementia umbrella.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 9
5
There are a number of different types of dementia which affect individuals differently. The 
experience of living with dementia is also affected by other people’s attitudes and views. 
The flow diagram below shows how negative views of dementia can cause a negative 
experience.
There are many causes of dementia. The two most common types are Alzheimer’s disease 
and Vascular Dementia:
Dementia is often thought to be a condition that only 
affects older people; however dementia can affect 
anyone at any age. In particular, individuals with 
learning disabilities are more likely to experience 
dementia at an early age. The Alzheimer’s Society 
estimates that there are more than 40,000 people 
under the age of 65 living with dementia. 
You can find out more from their website:
www.alzheimers.org.uk/
If people view living 
with dementia as 
a constant loss of 
abilities…
…that there is 
nothing that can be 
done to support the 
person…
…then the person 
living with dementia 
will most likely 
experience feelings 
of ill-being…
…that can then 
contribute to a 
negative experience 
of living with the 
condition.
Learning disabilities 
Learning disability is a result of brain development being affected before birth, during 
birth or in a person’s childhood. An individual with a learning disability may have difficulty 
understanding information, learning new skills, communicating and living independently.  
The experience of living with a learning disability varies depending on whether it is mild, 
moderate or severe. People with a mild learning disability may only need a little support 
to be independent while someone with a severe learning disability may not be able to 
communicate verbally and may need constant specialist support. Individuals may have 
other physical and sensory conditions alongside their learning disability, and may have 
difficulty responding to feelings and emotions. They may express themselves in ways that 
others find difficult to understand which can in turn affect how others see and respond to 
them.
In individuals with Alzheimer’s 
disease a bad protein develops in 
the brain causing damage to the 
brain cells and their connections.  
Vascular dementia is caused by 
oxygen failing to get to the brain 
cells as a result of problems with 
the blood supply (the vascular 
system).  
Although the symptoms of each type of dementia are different, all types of dementia are 
progressive. This means that individuals experience a gradual decline in their thinking, 
processing and remembering skills. How gradual and how serious this is varies in each 
individual, and will be affected by the care and support they have.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 9
6
Learning disabilities can result from a number of causes, but the particular cause in any 
given person is not always known. Causes can include:


genetic conditions such as Down’s Syndrome which happens as a result of an extra 
chromosome. This leads to impairments in both cognitive ability and physical growth 
that range from mild to moderate developmental disabilities.


complications during birth which can lead to lack of oxygen which impedes the 
baby’s development


illness or injury in childhood which has affected the brain, such as meningitis.
In most cases living with a learning disability will have a lifelong impact but this will vary 
depending on the type of learning disability.
Mistaking conditions
Some symptoms of living with mental health needs, dementia or a learning disability are 
very similar which can lead to conditions being mistaken for one another. The table below 
identifies some of the similar symptoms.
Psychosis
Depression/
Mood 
disorders
Anxiety
Dementia
Learning 
Disabilities
Confusion 
as a result of 
hallucinations 
and delusions
- Lack of insight 
and self-
awareness
- Problems with 
sleeping.
- Change 
in mood/
personality
- Problems with 
sleeping.
- Change 
in mood/
personality
- Problems with 
sleeping.
- Confusion 
as a result of 
memory loss
- Change 
in mood/
personality
- Problems 
with verbal 
communication
- Problems with 
sleeping.
- Confusion due 
to difficulties 
with memory 
or relating to 
information
- Lack of insight 
and self-
awareness 
- Problems 
with verbal 
communication.
Self-awareness 
This means having an understanding of yourself, your feelings, emotions and behaviours 
and understanding how your feelings, emotions and behaviours can affect others.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 9
7
Care and support 
As each individual is unique with a different personality, life history and experience, care 
and support should build on an individual’s particular wants, needs, skills and abilities. 
The experience of living with any of these conditions will be affected by the type of support 
someone receives. For example, if an individual with a learning disability is supported to 
use and develop their abilities they will become more independent.
Promoting positive attitudes
There is a lot of stigma linked to living with a mental health need, dementia or learning 
disability. This can create feelings of loneliness or being left out in society. However, 
through focusing on the abilities and skills someone has, living with the condition can be 
positive and people can be supported to live well. It is important that you demonstrate a 
positive attitude towards all those living with mental health needs, dementia and learning 
disabilities. You can do this by:


helping to reduce the stigma by making sure individuals are not isolated in  
social situations


promoting wellbeing for those living with the condition


identifying and building on skills and abilities the individual has


providing opportunities for individuals to feel empowered and in control.
The social model of 
disability, positive 
attitudes and person 
centred practice
The ‘social model of disability’ says 
that a person’s disability is the way 
that organised society responds to 
that individual and their condition, 
rather than being their impairment 
or difference itself. This is a different 
from the ‘medical model’ of disability 
which focuses on treating or trying 
to cure an illness. 
The social model looks for ways 
of removing barriers that limit 
life choices. When barriers are 
removed, people can work towards 
being as independent as they can 
be and be included and equal in 
society.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 9
8
The social model puts the focus on the individual and their unique needs and not on their 
condition. This person-centred approach helps develop positive attitudes in society.
Adaptations 
Health and social care organisations usually need to work together to provide for care and 
support needs. For example, there may need to be an occupational therapy assessment to 
find out how a person manages their day-to-day life and any adaptations to their home that 
might be needed, such as handrails in the bathroom.
Emotional support may need to be considered for both the person living with the condition 
and their family or carers. This might involve arranging a befriender or a counselling 
service. 
Practical information or additional services about an individual’s condition, illness, financial 
and legal issues and opportunities to plan ahead should also be available. Forums, 
charities, helplines or support groups are all useful sources of support and information.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK
Accessible  
Can the individual gain access or entry to a part of the environment for example, a
building, a room or a specific service, or to information (especially written 
information).
Stereotyping
To stereotype means to use labels that identify an aspect of a person or group, for
example their age, sexual orientation, ability or gender, then using this label to make 
an assumption about them or the group they belong to. For example,  “All older 
people are deaf” is a stereotype based on an assumption that as you get older you 
are likely to lose your ability to hear.
These barriers could include:


the environment - for example, using pictures as well as words for signs and 
information 


the impact of people’s attitudes - for example, stereotyping all people with dementia 
as the same and assuming they will all be affected in the same way


the impact of an organisation’s approach - for example, ways of working that are set 
to meet the needs of the organisation rather than the individual.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 9
9
Reporting concerns 
If you think that someone is developing symptoms of a mental health problem or of 
dementia, or if you think that the support needs associated with their learning disability 
need reassessing, you should record this information and pass it on. Who you inform and 
how will depend on your workplace and your role. There may be other workers involved so 
it is important to follow your agreed ways of working on recording your observations to 
avoid information being lost or misinterpreted.
Agreed ways of working 
This refers to organisational policies and procedures. This includes procedures that 
are  less formally documented by individual employers and the self-employed as 
well as formal policies such as the Dignity Code and Compassion in Practice.
When recording information there are a number of points to consider: 


Ensure the information is accurate.


It should be clear, concise, and legible.


It should be non-ambiguous and state facts not opinions or assumptions.


The person involved should be given the opportunity to contribute.


Apply the principles of the General Data Protection Regulation 2016  
and maintain confidentiality 
The importance of early detection and diagnosis
An early diagnosis benefits the individual and their family and friends. It can support 
them to put steps in place to maximise their quality of life. Four benefits of diagnosis are 
described below.
Clear up uncertainty. It can be upsetting to live with symptoms like memory loss and 
changes in personality, particularly if you don’t understand why they are happening. 
As there are a number of conditions that have similar symptoms it is important that an 
accurate diagnosis is made. Although the diagnosis can be hard news to hear, it can 
clear up uncertainty and help someone to feel more in control.
Help the individual and their family and friends to plan. Planning for the future 
provides the opportunity to consider, discuss and record wishes and decisions. This is 
known as advance care planning; the individual makes plans about what they wish to 
happen while they are most able to be involved and make decisions.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 9
10
Identify possible treatments and therapies. An individual may want to consider 
taking medication for example, to relieve the symptoms of dementia or depression. 
They may also benefit from therapies such as counselling or cognitive behaviour 
therapy.
Provide the right information, resources and support. Through accessing 
information at an early stage someone can make best use of what is available, such as 
support groups. They can also identify financial support that they may be entitled to.
Adapting care and support 
If an individual is diagnosed as living with a mental health need, dementia or learning 
disability, they are likely to need changes to how care and support is provided over time. 
This will ensure that care and support continues to be person-centred. 
Changes may mean that workers need to develop skills to support people who find it 
difficult to communicate verbally, for example by learning Makaton. They may also need 
to learn how to use assistive technology like clocks and calendars, reminder messages or 
locator devices. Of course, the individuals themselves also need support to learn how to 
use such technology.
Makaton 
This is a form of language that uses a large collection of signs and symbols to 
support and encourage communication.  
Those living with mental health needs, dementia or a learning disability are more 
vulnerable to abuse. You should follow your agreed ways of working to make sure each 
individual is best protected from harm or abuse.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 9
11
Legal frameworks, policy and guidelines
Legislation and a number of polices have been developed to promote human rights, 
inclusion, equal life chances and citizenship of individuals with mental health needs, 
dementia or learning disabilities. These include: 
Human Rights Act 1998 – This identifies the fundamental rights and freedoms that all 
individuals have access to in the UK. It ensures that those with mental health needs, 
dementia or learning disabilities must be treated fairly and with respect. 
www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1998/42/contents
Care Act 2014 – This puts a general duty on local authorities to promote the wellbeing 
of individuals. The Act makes sure that care and support provided to those with mental 
health needs, dementia and learning disabilities provides for their physical, mental 
and emotional wellbeing. It puts the focus on prevention and ensuring things don’t get 
worse for an individual, providing information to ensure people can make informed 
decisions and ensuring there are a range of services available to meet people’s needs.
www.gov.uk/government/publications/care-act-2014-part-1-factsheets  
The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) 2016 – This ensures that 
organisations maintain the protection of data. The General Data Protection Regulation 
makes sure that personal data held by organisations is kept confidential, not kept 
longer than necessary and is accurate. This includes data about an individual’s health 
or condition. The regulation gives individuals the right to see the data and information 
held about them. 
https://ico.org.uk/for-organisations/guide-to-the-general-data-protection-regulation-
gdpr/ 
Safeguarding Adults National Framework – Safeguarding adults is about promoting 
people’s welfare and keeping them safe from harm and abuse. Individuals living with 
a mental health need, dementia and learning disability are particularly vulnerable and 
therefore services need to ensure they are working to maintain their safety.
www.adass.org.uk/adassmedia/stories/Publications/Guidance/safeguarding.pdf
Fundamental Standards of Quality and Safety – A guide developed by the Care 
Quality Commission (CQC) that describes the fundamental standards of quality and 
safety that people using health and social care services can expect.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 9
12
Mental capacity
A person’s mental capacity is their ability to make their own decisions. Having mental 
capacity means that they are able to understand information and make an informed 
decision or choice. 
All individuals have the right to make their own decisions. However, sometimes it is 
assumed that because they have a condition that can affect their cognitive abilities they 
are no longer able to make their own decisions. The Mental Capacity Act 2005 says 
that care and health services must assume that people have mental capacity unless 
there is good evidence to show that they have not. By assuming a person has capacity, 
opportunities can be provided that enable the person to make their own decisions which 
helps them to feel empowered, confident and in control.
‘Advance statements’ ensure that an individual’s wishes are taken into account in the 
future. This is often referred to as ‘advance care planning’. The purpose is to enable an 
individual to make choices and decisions about their future care and support in case there 
is a time when they are unable to make these decisions for themselves, for
example in the later stages of dementia. This can ensure that an individual is not given 
any care or treatment that they do not wish to receive but will receive the care they wish to 
have.
Many employers will provide further training, guidance and/or supervision to help health 
and social care workers understand mental capacity issues. Speak with your manager 
about opportunities to learn more about this important area.
Mental Health Act 1983 (MHA) – In most cases, when people are treated in hospital or 
another mental health facility they have agreed or volunteered to be there. These may 
be referred to as  “voluntary patients”.
However, there are cases when a person can be detained (also known as sectioned) 
under the Mental Health Act (1983) and treated without their agreement. The Mental 
Health Act (1983) is the main piece of legislation that covers the assessment, treatment 
and rights of people with a mental health disorder. Being admitted to hospital under 
this Act is sometimes described as being ‘sectioned.’ In 2007, the Act was amended to 
include community treatment orders as well as admission to hospital.
Mental Capacity Act 2005 (MCA) – This Act protects people who need care or 
treatment but may lack the mental capacity to make decisions for themselves. 
Everyone has the right to make their own decisions, and the Act says we must assume 
a person can unless an assessment is done which proves otherwise, whether or not 
we agree with that decision. When someone doesn’t have mental capacity, the person 
deciding for them must do so in the person’s best interests. Care and treatment of 
people who lack capacity must be the least restrictive of their rights and freedom 
possible (deprivation of liberty safeguards).
The act applies to people aged 16 and over in England and Wales. It also provides 
guidance to support people who need to make decisions on behalf of someone else.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 9
13
Making an assessment of capacity
There are two specific questions that can help in assessing a person’s capacity:
1. Does the person have an impairment, or a disturbance in the functioning, of their mind 
or brain? This can include, for example, conditions associated with mental illness, 
concussion, or symptoms of drug or alcohol abuse.
If so,
2. Does the impairment or disturbance mean that, even when given appropriate support, 
the person is still unable to make a specific decision when they need to?
The Mental Capacity Act 2005 states that a person is unable to make their own decisions if 
they are unable to do one or more of the following:


understand information given to them


retain information long enough to be able to make the decision


weigh up the information available to make the decision


communicate their decision – this can be through verbal communication or by using 
sign language or simply blinking an eye.  
It is essential that the individual is supported to find ways of communicating before a 
decision about their capacity is made. This might involve family, friends, carers and other 
workers. An assessment should be made based on the balance of probabilities. For 
example, is it more likely than not that the person lacks capacity?
There are five key principles that everyone must follow when assessing capacity, these 
are:


Always assume that the person can make their own decision.


Ensure all possible support is provided to make sure the person can make their own 
decision.


Do not assume someone cannot make a decision because you feel they are making 
an unwise or unsafe decision.


If it has been identified that the person cannot make a decision, someone can make 
a decision that is deemed to be in that person’s best interest.


If a person makes a decision on behalf of the individual, this must be the least 
restrictive option.
If you are supporting a person who is struggling to make decisions, it is important that you 
apply the five key principles.
An assessment of capacity may need to be made when a person is unable to make a 
particular decision at a specific time. The Mental Capacity Act 2005 applies to supporting 
an individual to make both day-to-day decisions (for example what to eat) and complex 
choices such as around care and support or managing finances. A mental capacity 
assessment is specific to a particular decision and the principles must be applied to 
individual decisions. It is important to remember that an individual may lack the capacity to 
make a specific decision, such as around their finances, but this does not mean that they 
lack capacity to make all decisions.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 9
14
Consent means giving agreement to, or approval of, a proposed action or decision, 
particularly after thoughtful consideration. In order to give their informed consent an
individual needs to understand fully what they are consenting to, including the 
repercussions it might have. The process of establishing informed consent will vary 
according to an individual’s assessed capacity to consent and the situation. Consent 
may be implied or explicit, and either written or verbal, and has by definition to be given 
voluntarily and in advance of the action or decision being taken.
Informed consent embraces the person-centred care values of individual autonomy, 
independence, respect and choice. Only if you provide information in a way that respects 
someone’s individual autonomy can they act independently and choose whether to give 
consent or not. 
The individual you are supporting might show their consent in a number of different ways. 


Implied consent means the individual is co-operating with you; for example, a person 
being supported to eat opens their mouth as the spoon gets nearer. 


Verbal consent is given when you are asking an individual if they are happy with a 
procedure and they answer positively. 


Written consent could be a signed consent form, but is often a document stating 
the outline of treatments, procedures, support or care that is proposed, which the 
individual signs to show agreement. 
For any of these forms of consent it is important that the individual understands fully what 
they are consenting to, the pros and cons, alternatives, possible outcomes, and likely 
consequences if they refuse their consent. Simply attending an appointment does not 
constitute consent if the person does not fully understand what the appointment is for.
Consent in Children (Healthcare)
People aged 16 or over are entitled to consent to their own treatment, and this can only be 
overruled in exceptional circumstances.
Like adults, young people (aged 16 or 17) are presumed to have sufficient capacity to 
decide on their own medical treatment, unless there is significant evidence to suggest 
otherwise.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 9
15
Mental Health, 
Dementia and 
Learning Disabilities
The CARE CERTIFICATE
9
What do you know now?
Standard
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 9
16
Activity 9.1a, b & c
Part i)
The issues that someone may 
experience if they have mental 
health needs, dementia or 
learning disabilities could be 
physical, social or psychological 
and will affect the individual in 
different ways.
List how someone may feel if they have one of the following conditions (this can 
include physical, social or psychological issues):
Anxiety
Depression
Psychosis
Dementia
Learning 
Disabilities
Explain how each condition may influence a person’s individual care needs:
Anxiety
Depression
Psychosis
Dementia
Learning 
Disabilities
Complete the table below to show your understanding of the needs and experiences of 
people with mental health conditions, dementia and learning disabilities:
List: this term means to identify the 
main points which can be written as 
bullet points.  
Explain: to explain something you 
will need to provide a clear account 
of your understanding including 
details like why and how.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 9
17
Activity 9.1a,b & c 
Part ii) 
Why is it important to understand 
that the causes and people’s 
support needs are different 
depending on whether they have 
a mental health condition or 
dementia or a learning disability?
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 9
18
Activity 9.2a
When working with individuals with 
mental health conditions, dementia and/
or learning disabilities, your attitude can 
have both positive and negative impacts. 
In the boxes below identify one example 
of a negative attitude and the impacts it 
may have. Then give an example of how 
to positively change and the impacts it 
could have on the individual.
Negative attitude: 
Impacts:
Positive change: 
Impacts:
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 9
19
Activity 9.2b
Fill in the boxes below to 
describe what is meant by 
the social model of disability 
and how it supports positive 
attitudes of workers and  
person-centred practice.
Describe: to describe means 
to create a picture with words, 
but not simply writing a list of 
bullet points.
The social model of disability suggests that…
It supports positive attitudes of workers because… 
It supports person-centred practice because…
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 9
20
Activity 9.3a
When supporting an individual with mental 
health conditions, dementia or learning 
disabilities, changes or adjustments might 
need to be made to a service in order to 
provide the best quality of care. 
In the table below, a suggested adaptation has 
been included for each condition. Describe 
what actions should be taken and why it would 
be useful for the condition.
Condition
Actions to be taken
What is it and why it would be useful?
Psychosis
Additional training for 
workers
Depression/
Mood Disorder
Access to information 
such as helplines
Anxiety
Emotional support 
provided by workers
Dementia
Access to support 
groups
Learning 
Disability
An occupational therapy 
assessment
Describe: to describe means 
to create a picture with words, 
but not simply writing a list of 
bullet points.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 9
21
Activity 9.3b
Reporting: Using your own 
organisation’s agreed procedure 
(where possible), describe how to 
report concerns associated with any 
unmet needs which may arise from 
mental health conditions, dementia or 
learning disability through agreed ways 
of working.
Describe: to describe means 
to create a picture with words, 
but not simply writing a list of 
bullet points.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 9
22
Activity 9.4a
An early detection of mental 
health conditions, dementia or 
learning disabilities can support 
an individual to maximise their 
quality of life. Complete the spider 
diagram below to list and explain 
the benefits of early detection.
Benefits of early 
detection
List: this term means to identify the main 
points which can be written as bullet points. 
Describe - To describe means to create 
a picture with words but not simply writing 
a list of bullet points.
Explain: to explain something you 
will need to provide a clear account of 
your understanding, including details 
like why and how.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 9
23
Activity 9.4b
Care and support might need 
to be adjusted when mental 
health conditions, dementia 
or learning disabilities are 
identified. For each of the 
examples below, state how 
and why care and support 
might need to be adjusted.
Activity Examples
Adjustment
How
Why
Mental health - anxiety
Rashid suffers from an 
anxiety disorder called 
claustrophobia. He is afraid 
of being in small spaces, 
which makes it impossible 
for him to go in a car or a 
bus or use a lift. Rashid 
finds using the bathroom 
challenging at times.
Next week he has an 
appointment he needs to go 
to.
Dementia
Paul has difficulties with 
activities such as preparing 
meals and eating regularly. 
This is because he loses 
track of time and forgets 
what time he needs to eat.
Learning disability
Eliza is living with Down’s 
Syndrome and is finding 
it difficult to communicate 
verbally with others around 
her.  
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 9
24
Activity 9.5a & b
There are a number of pieces of legislation and polices that 
have been developed to promote the human rights, inclusion, 
equal life chances and citizenship of individuals with mental 
health conditions, dementia or learning disabilities.
Complete the table below that identifies four examples of 
legislation and policies, along with their main requirements 
and how these can influence the day-to-day experiences of 
individuals with mental health conditions, dementia or learning 
disabilities and their families. Examples have been started for 
you to complete.
Legislation & Policies
Requirements
Influence to individual’s 
daily experience 
The Human Rights Act 1998
This Act sets a number of 
basic human rights that
all people have, including 
the right to life, the right 
to freedom from torture 
and degrading treatment, 
and the right to respect for 
private and family life.
Mental Capacity Act 2005
This act ….
This act ensures that 
those who hold personal 
information such as 
organisation’s and public 
bodies keep it confidential, 
accurate and only as long 
as necessary.
This act helps to improve 
individuals’ independence 
and wellbeing, allowing 
individuals access to the 
care they need before 
they develop into more 
serious needs and access 
to information to make 
informed decisions.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 9
25
Activity 9.6a
In your own words explain what is 
meant by the term capacity.
Explain: to explain something you will 
need to provide a clear account of your 
understanding including details like why 
and how.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 9
26
Activity 9.6b
At times you might be unsure 
whether individuals to whom you give 
care and support fully understand 
the choices they have or what type of 
support and care they need.
Explain why it is important to 
assume that someone has capacity 
to make decisions unless there is 
evidence that they do not.
Explain: to explain something you will 
need to provide a clear account of your 
understanding including details like why 
and how.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 9
27
Activity 9.6c
You will frequently come across the 
term consent and informed consent 
when working in health and social care. 
Answer the questions below to show your 
understanding of consent.
2. Write two examples to show how consent may change depending on the decision that is 
being made:
1.
2.
1.a. What is meant by the term ‘consent’?
1.b. What is meant by the term  
‘informed consent’?
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 9
28
Activity 9.6d
Complete the boxes below to 
describe where an assessment of 
capacity might need to be carried 
out and describe the meaning
and significance of ‘advance 
statements’ or ‘advance care 
planning’ regarding future care.
An assessment of capacity might need to be carried out where…
Advance statements (or plans) are very important and significant for future care 
because…
Describe: to describe means to create 
a picture with words but not simply 
writing a list of bullet points.
