THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK
Communication
The CARE CERTIFICATE
6
Standard
What you need to know
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 6
1
The importance 
of effective 
communication
Good communication develops 
your knowledge and understanding 
about individuals and the part 
played by other workers so that the 
best care and support possible can 
be provided. It helps build working 
relationships where each person’s 
views are valued and taken into 
account. 
69
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK
Communication 
Communication is an essential part of a caring relationship and helps to encourage 
trusting relationships with other workers and families as well as the individuals you 
care for. 
Types of communication 
Talking is often seen as the most common method or type of communication but most 
communication is silent. Gestures, tone of voice, grins, grimaces, shrugs, nods, moving 
away or closer, crossing arms and legs all tell us far more than words. Learning to take 
account of these reactions is all part of developing your communication skills to achieve 
the best outcomes for individuals. Communication can be harder when we can’t see these 
signs such as when we use the phone, texts or email.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 6
2
Different people have different ways of communicating that work best for them. Some of 
the different types of communication are:


Verbal  communication - Differences in how you speak, including the tone, pitch, 
speed and volume of your voice could change how your messages are taken in. 
Try to avoid using jargon or abbreviations and complicated words and terminology. 
Make sure you always speak in a respectful way, adjusting your speech to suit the 
individual. 


Sign language - This is a recognised language throughout the world. British Sign 
Language (BSL) is used by individuals in this country and there are variations of sign 
language in different regions. 


Makaton - This is a form of language that uses a large collection of signs and 
symbols. It is often used with those who have learning and physical disabilities, or 
hearing impairment.


Braille - Is a code of raised dots that are ‘read’ using touch. For people who are 
visually impaired or who are blind, the system supports reading and writing.


Body language – This is a type of nonverbal communication. There are many 
different aspects of body language, including gestures, facial expressions, eye 
contact, body positioning and body movements. Each of these will communicate 
information about an individual or a worker often without them realising it.


Gestures – These are hand or arm movements that emphasise what is being said or 
used as an alternative to speaking.


Facial expressions – These support what is being said by showing reactions or 
feelings. They can give you valuable clues that you can use to check out a  
person’s feelings.


Eye contact - Maintaining good eye contact is an important way for a worker to 
show that they are engaged and listening.


Position - The way that we stand, sit or hold our arms when we are talking will 
provide others with clues about our feelings, attitude and emotions.


Written communication - This method is used to send messages, keep records, or 
provide evidence. 
Communication with other workers and individuals
Workers will develop many different relationships. Some will be formal and others more 
informal. Successful two-way communication is crucial in both cases. A relationship based 
on trust and understanding from the beginning will provide the basis for good care and 
support whether short or long-term.  
Poor communication can quickly lead to confusion and distress. The process of 
exchanging information through communication is not always straightforward. If the 
information shared is inaccurate or misleading, mistakes can be made which can result in 
poor care. 
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 6
3
Formal 
Formal communication is likely to be used in the working environment, particularly 
between you and other workers.
Informal 
Informal communication is likely to be used with friends and family, using familiar 
words or slang.You should always use the communication method that is appropriate 
for the person and situation.
You should watch for clues from any individual that come from unspoken messages. 
These non-verbal ways of communicating come from body language, position, facial 
expressions or gestures. For example, when asking someone if they are in pain, they 
may say ‘no’ but a wrinkled brow, uncomfortable facial expression or body movement may 
say otherwise. As an observant worker you will be able to notice when an individual is 
becoming confused, angry, upset, stressed or anxious without them telling you. You can 
then take action to help stop this from happening or help them express their feelings in the 
best way for them.
By noticing an individual’s reactions you can ask yourself the following questions: 


Do I need to change the type of communication I am using to help the individual 
understand?


Do I need to be aware of how the conversation is affecting them?


Is there something that the individual is not communicating to me that may help?
Recognising the unspoken messages can help you to ask good questions and develop 
supportive relationships. It improves trust as the individual can see that you are interested 
in them and trying to understand and meet their needs. 
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 6
4
Communication and language needs, wishes and preferences 
To find out what an individual needs or wants, so your work can be centred on them as 
a person, you have to connect with them. So that means that you must understand their 
communication needs right from the outset. 
People’s unique communication needs vary depending on their ability, disability, illness 
or condition, as well as on their personal preferences. If you can’t find out from talking 
and listening how a person needs to communicate, you will need to use other methods 
of communication to help them get information across to you in a way that works best for 
them. The individual’s family, friends or carer might be able to share experience of which 
communication methods work best—but sometimes part of the problem is that they don’t 
communicate well with the person being supported, so don’t rely on this method alone.
Communicating by touch or physical contact
The individual’s preferences are particularly important in relation to using touch as part of 
non-verbal communication. Touching a person might be done as a form of communication, 
for example shaking hands or kissing. But other types of touch will almost certainly 
also communicate something to them, for example what they experience from the ways 
that they are physically helped to stand or sit or turn over in bed, and particularly their 
experience of being touched in the course of intimate personal care such as washing. 
In all cases, how you touch anyone must be decided thoughtfully and in a person-centred 
way. So your use of touch may well be different from one person to the next, and will be 
something that you will need to talk about with each person whom you are helping so 
that you know their particular preferences. This is also a key area to talk about with your 
manager and work colleagues, especially if you are supporting anyone who cannot clearly 
communicate their own preferences to you.
On the whole, any form of touch must be consented to by both people. But sometimes it 
may be necessary to touch someone when they do not want to be touched, for example if 
they need to be physically restrained for their own or someone else’s safety. You must talk 
with your manager about what are the agreed ways of working in your workplace so you 
know what to do if this happens.
Remember too that the use of touch must be within the rules for infection control in your 
workplace. 
See also Care Certificate standards 7 (Privacy and dignity) and 15 (Infection prevention 
and control). 
Some specialist methods of communication
Touch is used in particular ways to communicate with people who are deaf and visually 
impaired. Workers sign information onto the individual’s hands as a way of passing on 
information. 
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 6
5
For those whose communication skills may be limited, technological aids can be used. 
Hearing aids, hearing loops, text phones, text messaging on mobile phones and magnifiers 
are all forms of technological communication devices.
Some individuals may use word or symbol boards to support their speech and/or their 
understanding. This helps the listener by to associating a picture or printed word with the 
verbal communication in order to be able to understand what is being said.
Others may use speech synthesisers, which replace speech either by producing a visual 
display of written text or by producing synthesised speech that expresses the information 
verbally. Voice recognition software can be purchased for computers (including many 
tablet ‘pad’ computers with touch screens) to translate speech to written text or the other 
way around. Some word-processing programs and apps have this already built in. 
When using communication aids always check that they function properly, that they are 
clean and in good working order. Should you have any worries about communication aids 
or technology not working properly, or being unclean, report this to a senior member of 
staff or the individual’s carer or family member.
Barriers to effective communication
A barrier is anything that will get in the way of communication. There are a wide range of 
barriers including:
Attitude – When a worker is abrupt due to time limits, not having enough resources or 
their mood, the person they are speaking to may feel intimidated or frustrated and not want 
to communicate.
Limited use of technology – When the technological aids known to be the best way for 
someone to communicate are not available.
Body positioning – Sitting too close could be intimidating and would make an individual 
feel uncomfortable. Sitting too far away could show lack of interest or concern.
Emotions – When someone is depressed, angry, embarrassed or upset their emotions 
may affect their ability to think and communicate in a sensible way.
Physical – When someone has physical conditions that create communication difficulties, 
for example, being breathless, not having any teeth or being in pain.
Not enough time – Not giving individuals time to say what they want may make them feel 
rushed and reluctant to express their true wishes.
Poor or negative body language – Crossed arms or legs, poor facial expressions, poor 
body positioning, constant fidgeting or looking at a watch or mobile phone can all make 
someone less likely to communicate.
Lack of privacy – Think carefully about where and when private and confidential 
conversations should take place.
Stereotyping – Generalisations about a group of people that are wrong and misleading. 
An example would be that ‘all older people are hard of hearing’.
Other barriers include sensory impairments, culture, language, noise, lighting or substance 
misuse.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 6
6
Reducing barriers to communication  
As a worker you should do what you can to reduce any barriers to communication. The 
most effective way to make sure that you are meeting someone’s communication needs 
and providing person-centred care is to know as much as possible as you can about them.
A ‘communication passport’ might be used by some which provides vital information 
about their needs, wishes and preferences. This pulls together the information into a 
format that is easy to read, often with pictures and photographs. Putting something like 
this together with an individual can be another good way of getting to know them well 
and understanding their needs. Your organisation might have a suggested format but at a 
simple level you can put one together with the individual to suit them.
It is important to get regular feedback about your communication style and methods from 
the people you provide care and support to so that you can continue to improve how you 
communicate. You could also increase your awareness of different communication needs 
and methods through taking up learning opportunities. Experience will help you to develop 
a variety of new methods of communication and selecting the best one in each situation. 
Be creative. Open body language and a positive, non-judgemental attitude will further help
reduce barriers. Your communication skills should be seen as a toolbox, using the right tool 
for the right job and choosing a different tool if one doesn’t work well.
Checking understanding 
Checking that communication has been understood 
is an essential part of the process. A vital skill that 
checks understanding is summarising. A summary 
should bring together the main points of an exchange 
of information. This will allow the individual to correct 
you if necessary. This can help you to check that you 
have correctly understood. Questions are another way 
of checking whether a message has been received. 
Make sure you ask questions in a way that the 
individual has to provide a detailed response (open 
questions), rather than asking questions which require 
only a ‘yes’ or ‘no’ reply (closed questions). For 
example: ‘What do you like to do in your spare time?’ 
However, closed questions can be useful in some 
situations.
Summarise 
This means to think about the main points of the conversation or communication and 
shorten or simplify them in order to repeat them back to the individual. This will help to 
check your and their understanding.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 6
7
Additional information and support
Information and support on particular communications needs can be found from specialist 
charities and associations, especially those specialising in particular disabilities or medical 
conditions. Websites can provide material on forums, services or groups in the local area 
that you could attend or use to find out more. 
In addition, some local charities offer specific human aids such as befrienders, advocates 
or mentors. A befriender could support an individual in overcoming emotional difficulties 
that are a barrier to their communication. An advocate could communicate on an 
individual’s behalf if their skills are very limited. 
A number of additional key experts available to support individuals with their 
communication needs include speech and language therapists, interpreters, translators, 
and clinical psychologists or counsellors. Further learning can come from other workers, 
your manager and a wide range of courses and qualifications.
Confidentiality
Confidentiality is an essential principle in health and social care and forms the basis of all 
ways of working and codes of practice. The basis of a good working relationship is trust. 
This is dependent on the individual being confident that personal information about them is 
treated confidentially. Information about someone must only be shared with others involved 
in their care and support on a ‘need-to-know’ basis. Any information should not usually
be disclosed without the person’s informed consent. The circumstances when information 
must be shared even if the individual does not give consent are listed later in this section.
An individual’s right to confidentiality also means that a person’s notes or details must 
always be stored securely, for example in a locked cupboard, and not be left where they 
can be seen by unauthorised people. Computers or mobile devices such as electronic 
tablets need to be protected by a password and firewall. When talking about an individual 
you must ensure no others can overhear you.
It is essential that you obey the laws about confidentiality, particularly:
General Data Protection Regulation 2016 – which place obligations on organisations 
to process personal data securely.  This includes protecting people’s privacy, giving 
individuals the right to consent to data collection and the right to have data removed.
Informed consent  
To give informed consent the individual must be provided with all of the necessary 
information in order to make a considered decision. See standard 9 for further 
information about consent and informed consent.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 6
8
Human Rights Act 1998 – This Act determines a number of basic rights for any citizen of 
the UK. The important one in this context is the right to respect for private and family life, 
home and correspondence.
www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1998/42/contents
You must find out from your manager what your workplace’s agreed ways of working are 
for putting these laws and other aspects of confidentiality into practice.
Limits to confidentiality
Whenever possible, individuals should provide their consent for the transfer of information. 
However, this may not always be possible and there will be occasions when information 
normally considered confidential needs to be shared. Examples of occasions when 
confidentiality may have to be broken are:


a person is likely to harm themselves


a person has been, or is likely to be, involved in a serious crime


a person is likely to harm others


your safety is placed at risk


a child or vulnerable adult has suffered, or is at risk of suffering, significant harm.
There will be times when you face dilemmas about confidentiality, not knowing what to do 
or if you should speak to anyone about the information you have. At these times it
is important to speak with your manager and follow the agreed ways of working. If your 
manager is not available, a senior member of staff or other worker should be able to help.
See also Care Certificate standard 14 (Handling information).
Communication in summary
Communication may take place face-to-face, by telephone or text, by email, internet or
social networks, by written reports or letters. It requires you to listen or read (and 
understand) as well as to speak or write. Whether you are communicating face-to-face, 
on the telephone or in written form, always be respectful, try to match your method of 
communication to the individual’s needs and be aware of confidentiality.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK
Communication
The CARE CERTIFICATE
6
What do you know now?
Standard
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 6
10
Activity 6.1a 
Choose five different types 
of communication and 
describe how and when 
they might be used.
Type
How and when it could be used
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Communication
Describe - to describe means to create a 
picture with words but not simply writing 
a list of bullet points.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 6
11
Activity 6.1b 
Use examples from your 
own workplace to describe 
how good and poor 
communication could affect 
relationships at work.
1. Examples of good communication affecting a work relationship:
2. Examples of poor communication affecting a work relationship: 
Describe - to describe means to create a 
picture with words but not simply writing 
a list of bullet points.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 6
12
Activity 6.1c 
Imagine you are talking to an 
individual about a change to their 
care plan. During the conversation, 
which starts very relaxed, you notice 
that the person starts getting fidgety 
and avoiding eye contact. Their 
body language changes, they turn 
sideways on their chair so they no 
longer face you.
1. Why is it important that you notice the changes in the other person’s reactions? 
2. Why is it important that you respond to the changes in the other person’s 
reactions? 
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 6
13
Activity 6.2a 
Part i) Use the spider 
diagram to list four ways 
that can help you to 
establish an individual’s 
communication or language 
needs, wishes and 
preferences.
Ways that can help 
me to establish 
communication 
language 
needs, wishes & 
preferences
List: to list means to write in bullet points 
or provide short answers that are straight 
to the point.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 6
14
Activity 6.2a 
Part ii) Describe how each 
of the above can help you 
to establish an individual’s 
communication and 
language needs, wishes 
and preferences.
2
3
4
Describe: to describe means to create  
a picture with words but not simply writing 
a list of bullet points. Include details like 
why and how.
1
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 6
15
Activity 6.2b
Think of the different communication 
needs, wishes and preferences that 
individuals may have. Complete 
the diagram below to list at least 
six different styles or methods of 
communication that could help 
you when communicating with 
individuals. An example has been 
provided for you.
Communication 
styles and 
methods that help 
to meet needs, 
wishes and 
preferences
Touch 
List: to list means to write in 
bullet points or provide short 
answers that are straight to the 
point.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 6
16
Activity 6.3a & b
Complete the table below 
to make a list of potential 
barriers to effective 
communication and 
describe ways to reduce 
the barrier. An example has 
been provided for you.
Barrier to communication
How it can be reduced
1.  Substance misuse
If an individual’s behaviour is affected because of misuse 
of substances, I need to think carefully about how I will 
use my communication skills to make sure the individual 
is supported. If they are frustrated and angry I will need to 
use a calming tone of voice and relaxed body language 
but maintain a safe distance.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Describe: to describe means to create  
a picture with words but not simply writing 
a list of bullet points. Include details like 
why and how.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 6
17
Activity 6.3c
During any conversation or 
discussion, you would like to know 
that you have got your point across 
to the other person or people, and 
that they know or understand what 
you mean. How could you check 
to make sure that the other person 
understands what you are saying?
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 6
18
Activity 6.3d
Think of an individual or group of 
individuals in your workplace that 
you might struggle to communicate 
with. Make sure you respect 
confidentiality by not using their 
name. Who could help you with 
information, support or services to 
communicate more effectively? How 
could they help?
The example from my place of work I have chosen is: 
I could find information and support or services from: 
They could help me to: 
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 6
19
Activity 6.4a
In your own words, 
describe the meaning of 
confidentiality in relation 
to your job role. You might 
use your contract or job 
description to help you.
In my job role as _____________________________________ , confidentiality 
means:
Describe: to describe means to create  
a picture with words but not simply writing 
a list of bullet points. Include details like 
why and how.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 6
20
Activity 6.4b
Familiarise yourself with 
your workplace’s agreed 
ways of working in relation 
to confidentiality. Complete 
the table below to list 
legislation and agreed 
ways of working to maintain 
confidentiality in your daily 
routines.
Agreed ways of working: this refers to company 
policies and procedures.This includes those less 
formally documented by individual employers and the 
self-employed as well as formal policies such as the 
Dignity Code, Essence of Care and Compassion in 
Practice.
Legislation
Agreed ways of working
List: to list means to write in bullet points or provide 
short answers that are straight to the point.
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 6
21
Activity 6.4c
At times you may come across 
situations where you need to 
share confidential information, 
even if the individual doesn’t 
want you to. Give three 
examples of situations that might 
happen in your workplace where 
information might need to be 
passed on to other key people.
Example 1:
Example 2:
Example 3:
THE CARE CERTIFICATE WORKBOOK STANDARD 6
22
Activity 6.4d
Imagine one of the situations 
you have described in the 
last task happens whilst you 
are on duty. Who could you 
ask for advice and support 
about confidentiality? And 
how would they be able to 
help you?
People I could ask:
They could help me with advice and support because:
